Category: Alliance manifesto
Version: Original
URL: https://assets.nationbuilder.com/allianceparty/pages/11234/attachments/original/1718832706/2024WestminsterManifesto.pdf?1718832706

JULY 2024
ALLIANCE PARTY WESTMINSTER MANIFESTO 2024
Alliance 
Leading Change 
for Everyone
KEY POLICIES
1
Reforming the Assembly and Executive so no one party can hold 
us all to ransom. 
 
2
Delivering an improved financial settlement for Northern Ireland 
that properly reflects our relative need and allows investment in 
our public services and economy. 
 
3
Revising fiscal rules to account for the costs of environmental 
inaction and to enable investment in climate action. 
 
4
Creating a Green New Deal to decarbonise our economy, protect 
workers, tackle fuel poverty, and create thousands of jobs. 
 
5
Repairing the UK-EU relationship, including negotiating a 
comprehensive Veterinary Agreement and better promoting dual 
market access under the Windsor Framework. 
 
6
Securing dedicated funding for integration, early years, and early 
intervention projects as a successor to Fresh Start. 
 
7
Supporting families with childcare costs by demanding more 
generous tax relief and the creation of a new childcare strategy 
for Northern Ireland. 
 
8
Advocating for a fair, welcoming, and effective immigration system 
that upholds human rights and meets the needs of our economy. 
 
9
Reforming UK democracy by scrapping the Tories’ anti-protest laws, 
First Past the Post and introducing votes at 16. 
 
10 Championing human rights and the rule of law domestically 
and internationally.
Alliance, it adds up 
for Everyone
CONTENTS
PAGE 1
                    LEADER’S FOREWORD                                                                                                               2 
 
                    DEPUTY LEADER’S FOREWORD                                                                                          3 
 
                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                               4 
 
CHAPTER 1:   LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND                                                7 
                  INSTITUTIONAL REFORM                                                                                                             8 
                  NORTH-SOUTH AND EAST-WEST COOPERATION                                                      10 
                  SHARED FUTURE                                                                                                                             10 
                  DEALING WITH THE PAST                                                                                                           11 
 
CHAPTER 2:  UK PUBLIC FINANCES                                                                                                           12 
                  IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES, ECONOMY AND CLIMATE                                     13 
                  FISCAL RULES REFORM                                                                                                              13 
                  TAXATION, PENSIONS AND WELFARE SUPPORT                                                        14 
                  CHILDCARE                                                                                                                                         16 
                  NORTHERN IRELAND PUBLIC FINANCES                                                                         16 
 
CHAPTER 3:  NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY                                                                                18 
                  CHANGING UK ECONOMIC POLICY                                                                                      19 
                  SUPPORTING NORTHERN IRELAND’S ECONOMY                                                      20 
 
CHAPTER 4:  GREEN NEW DEAL                                                                                                                   22 
                  TACKLING THE ENERGY CRISIS                                                                                             23 
                  KEY GREEN NEW DEAL COMMITMENTS                                                                          24 
 
CHAPTER 5:  MIGRATION                                                                                                                                     26 
                  REFORMING THE VISA SYSTEM                                                                                             27 
                  OVERHAULING THE ASYLUM SYSTEM                                                                               28 
                  PROTECTING THE COMMON TRAVEL AREA                                                                  29 
 
CHAPTER 6:  UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY               30 
                  HUMAN RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES                                                                               31 
                  DEMOCRACY AT WESTMINSTER                                                                                            31 
                  EQUALITY AND SOCIAL JUSTICE                                                                                         32 
                  DIGITAL DEVELOPMENTS AND ONLINE SAFETY                                                        32 
 
CHAPTER 7:  OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION                                33 
                  OUR POSITION ON BREXIT                                                                                                       34 
                  IMPLEMENTING THE WINDSOR FRAMEWORK                                                              35 
                  FIXING THE UK-EU RELATIONSHIP                                                                                      36 
 
CHAPTER 8:  INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE                                                       37 
                  SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS                                                         38 
                  SUPPORT FOR THE ARMED FORCES                                                                                 40 
                  DEFENCE SPENDING AND CO-OPERATION                                                                   40 
                  GLOBAL JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT                                     41 
                  DEALING WITH PANDEMICS                                                                                                    42 
                  SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND POLITICAL FREEDOMS                               43
PAGE 2
LEADER’S FOREWORD
LEADER’S FOREWORD
This election is a chance not only to remove a 
negative, destructive Conservative 
government but also to hold to account those 
local politicians who propped up, supported 
and backed some of their most divisive, 
regressive policies. 
We have a chance for change. 
But to make that change happen, you have to 
help us deliver it. 
On Thursday the 4th of July, you have the 
opportunity to make a positive change to your 
life and the lives of everyone in Northern 
Ireland. To positively influence the issues that 
matter to you most. To support a united 
community and reduce division in our society. 
To ensure you have positive representation at 
Westminster, committed to a more prosperous 
and fair society for everyone. 
Together, we can lead that change. Your 
support plus our commitment to delivery 
equals a brighter, more optimistic future for 
everyone. 
If that’s the sort of leadership you want, play 
your part. 
On July 4th, Vote Alliance.
We stand ready to expand our team in 
Westminster, returning Stephen Farry 
alongside more Alliance MPs. Building on our 
successes in the 2022 Assembly election and 
local government elections last year, we know 
that people want strong Alliance 
representation at all levels of government. 
Alliance is already leading change on better 
health outcomes, making our communities 
safer, expanding inclusive education and 
delivering affordable childcare. We are 
working to combat climate change, promote a 
cleaner, greener environment and to create a 
vibrant and dynamic economy. 
In this Westminster manifesto, we have set out 
our policy priorities for the next five-year 
term. We have focused specifically on those 
matters over which Westminster has direct 
control or influence. This isn’t a stand-alone 
document – to get the fullest picture of how 
Alliance plans to deliver better; it should be 
read in conjunction with our Local 
Government and Assembly manifestos and 
our policy documents on Childcare, 
Institutional Reform and our Green New Deal. 
Crucially, we can use increased influence at 
Westminster to unlock a fairer financial deal 
for Northern Ireland and advance reform of 
the Assembly and Executive so no one party 
can collapse things ever again. Fairer funding 
and stable institutions add up to more 
sustainable politics and public services – a 
brighter future for everyone. 
Alliance is growing as more people recognise 
that a divided society means less for 
everyone. The cost of division means 
hundreds of millions of pounds less to invest 
each year in what really matters to you. 
Naomi Long 
Leader of the Alliance Party
I have been steadfast in defending Northern 
Ireland from a hard Brexit. I consistently 
opposed destructive unilateral actions from 
the Conservatives and the DUP, which would 
have severely damaged our economy. Instead, 
I have worked to provide practical solutions to 
a range of problems, and build a closer 
relationship between the UK and EU will 
remain a major priority in the forthcoming 
Parliament. 
As the leading advocate for reforming 
Northern Ireland’s political institutions in 
Westminster, I have worked tirelessly to 
ensure that we never again face a situation 
where they collapse, leaving a political 
vacuum and long-term damage to our 
economy and public services. I have 
consistently stood up for all our rights, civil 
liberties, and the rule of law, pushing back 
against divisive and toxic Tory rhetoric, and 
opposing regressive legislation. 
The Alliance Party recognises that trust in 
politics is crucial for an effective democratic 
society. I am determined to help restore that 
trust by promoting transparency, 
accountability, and integrity in public life. 
I hope to be returned to Parliament with 
colleagues so that we can build on this 
success, using our influence at Westminster to 
make Northern Ireland a better place for 
everyone.
It has been my greatest privilege to represent 
North Down in Westminster over the past four 
years. My dedication to serving the people of 
North Down has been unwavering and I am 
proud of my track record: delivering on behalf 
of my constituents and making their voices 
heard. 
My small team and I have consistently 
punched well above our weight and achieved 
a great deal in this Parliament. I have used my 
platform to tackle crucial issues facing 
Northern Ireland and beyond, in line with the 
Alliance Party’s vision of a shared and 
integrated society, ensuring fairness, 
inclusivity, and prosperity for all. 
I led the charge in securing the £3.3 billion 
financial package for Northern Ireland, 
providing much-needed relief to support our 
public services and economy while continuing 
to advocate for sustainable, long-term 
solutions. 
I have championed calls for the UK 
Government’s fiscal rules to adopt a more 
long-term approach to investment, recognise 
the indirect costs of environmental inaction, 
and unlock essential funding for public 
services. 
The Alliance Party has pioneered the concept 
of a Green New Deal for Northern Ireland, 
aiming to create new green jobs, promote 
social justice, and save our planet. 
Stephen Farry 
Deputy Leader of the Alliance Party
DEPUTY LEADER’S FOREWORD
PAGE 3
DEPUTY LEADER’S FOREWORD
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
PAGE 4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We want to see: 
•
Changes to the Fiscal Rules, so the impact 
of public spending decisions on the UK’s 
overall asset base (or wealth) is reflected, 
rather than just its impact on debt. This 
would better capture and reflect the costs 
associated with climate inaction, unlock 
vital investment in struggling public 
services, incentivise investment in our 
infrastructure and skills, as well as provide 
resilience to external shocks and risks such 
as climate change. 
•
A progressive taxation system, where the 
super-wealthy pay their fair share, and the 
phased implementation of carbon taxes to 
raise more money for public services, and 
to progress the transition to net zero. 
•
A radical rethink of the social security 
system. Food bank use is rising and people 
are often unable to survive on the 
inadequate income benefits provide. 
•
A major investment in childcare, both 
through a bespoke model in Northern 
Ireland and through tax relief at 
Westminster. 
 
3 NORTHERN IRELAND 
PUBLIC FINANCES 
Northern Ireland is not adequately funded to 
reflect relative need, and so our capacity to 
sustain and transform public services is 
hindered. To sustain and transform our 
education, health and justice systems, to 
invest in public sector pay, drive the local 
economy and protect our environment, we 
need fair funding. 
1 LEADING CHANGE 
FOR NORTHERN IRELAND 
Northern Ireland has transformed in many 
ways since the signing of the Good Friday 
Agreement in 1998. But while our society, our 
economy and even our politics have evolved, 
our institutions have not, and they are now 
holding back progress. 
We believe: 
•
Northern Ireland deserves better than 
stop-start politics. Our institutions should 
be reformed to prevent any one party from 
holding them hostage ever again. 
•
In a society for everyone, underpinned by 
our shared values of equality, respect for 
diversity and interdependence. Funding 
should be released for key projects such as 
integrated schools and early years 
investment that will help us build a shared 
future. 
•
That justice should have no time limit, and 
we support those seeking truth, justice and 
acknowledgement for the events of the 
past. The Legacy Act should be replaced 
with an alternative that has the support of 
victims and local parties. 
 
2 UK PUBLIC FINANCES 
Public services have been squeezed beyond 
recognition and the UK’s public finances are in 
a very bad place. Without reform, current UK 
fiscal policy is inhibiting investment, 
reinforcing climate inaction and storing up 
environmental, social and financial crises for 
the future. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
PAGE 5
To achieve this, Alliance will: 
•
Work to secure a base-lined fiscal floor, set 
above 124, at the next spending review. We 
do not believe the UK Government’s figure 
of 124 captures our relative need and 
believe this will be borne out by 
independent analysis that the Treasury 
should commission. 
•
Continue to press for long-term 
transformation and public spending on an 
‘invest to save’ basis. There is much more 
we can do with the money we have to 
ensure quality public services for people in 
NI. 
•
Tackle the cost of division. Research from 
2016 cited the costs of division in NI ranged 
between £400-800m. We want the UK 
Government to fund new research into the 
updated costs, so that we can tackle it and 
funnel savings back into public services. 
 
4 ECONOMY 
We believe Northern Ireland can become 
Europe's most innovative and dynamic 
regional economy. We have many strengths, 
including unique dual market access. Whilst 
many economic levers lie in the hands of the 
NI Executive, Westminster can and should do 
more to enable NI’s growth. 
We want to see: 
•
The promotion of dual market access for 
Northern Ireland. The Windsor Framework 
provides NI with a relative opportunity 
compared to the rest of the UK in relation 
to unfettered access for goods. This 
opportunity should be exploited to the 
benefit of businesses and people in NI. 
•
The Apprenticeship Levy reviewed, with 
any levy raised from Northern Ireland ring-
fenced for re-investment in skills. 
•
Renewed partnerships between 
Government and local businesses in NI on a 
North-South and East-West basis. 
•
Support for regional industries by boosting 
research, innovation, skills, infrastructure 
and access to finance across the entire UK. 
•
A legal duty placed on the UK Government 
to ensure its economic policies are 
assessed on their likelihood of reducing 
regional inequality in the economy and that 
levelling up is accelerated. 
•
A fundamental review of the Levelling Up 
and Shared Prosperity Funds, so that they 
support local priorities in NI and are 
controlled by the NI Executive. 
 
5 GREEN NEW DEAL 
We believe tackling the climate emergency 
goes hand in hand with economic 
transformation and social justice. In 2021, we 
published the Alliance Green New Deal that 
sets out our plan for a fair, green economy. 
Since then, energy prices and the cost of 
living have reached a crisis point due to the 
Conservative Government's reckless inaction 
and u-turns on critical climate pledges. 
We will continue to make the case for a Green 
New Deal. We believe: 
•
Energy security is more important than 
ever. We must invest in renewable energy 
to guard against price precarity and to 
boost the industry in Northern Ireland. 
•
We need a UK-wide emergency retrofitting 
programme to reduce emissions and tackle 
fuel poverty. 
•
A just transition to net zero, part funded 
through tax increases on fossil fuel giants 
and wealth, property taxes on the super-
rich and via long-term green bond 
issuance, ISAs and pension funds. 
•
The use of fossil fuels should end, with a 
ban on fracking and the opening of new 
coal mines and pits. 
 
6 MIGRATION 
Alliance believes in a united community. That 
means representing everyone in Northern 
Ireland, celebrating the diversity of our 
communities and upholding the rights and 
dignity of us all. 
We reject the current rhetoric around 
migrants and asylum seekers, and we support 
a fair and compassionate immigration system 
for the UK that recognises the invaluable role 
migrants play in our economy. 
PAGE 6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We want to see: 
•
An overhaul of the visa system to make it 
more affordable and the removal of cruel 
minimum threshold salary requirements for 
family visas. 
•
The scrapping of the shortage occupation 
list and points-based system, replacing it 
with a visa system based on the real needs 
of Northern Ireland’s economy and society. 
•
The creation of safe routes for asylum 
seekers to reduce exploitation and 
trafficking, and so that no one is forced to 
make treacherous journeys to the UK. 
•
The Rwanda Scheme abolished, and 
asylum claims processed quickly in a 
trauma-informed way. 
•
The right to work for asylum seekers in any 
job after three months so they can support 
themselves and their families and become 
active members of their communities. 
 
7 UK POLITICAL REFORM, 
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY 
Just as Alliance stands for openness, honestly 
and fairness in Stormont, we will continue to 
seek to enshrine these values  in Westminster. 
We believe human rights, equality and the rule 
of law are cornerstones of safety and stability, 
and must be defended more robustly than 
ever after the last Government. 
Alliance MPs will demand: 
•
A fairer electoral system for the House of 
Commons, and a directly-elected House of 
Lords. 
•
Votes at 16 for all elections and 
referendums. 
•
A trans-inclusive ban on so-called 
Conversion Therapy that extends to NI. 
•
Better regulation of AI and social media, 
including a watchdog for child safety 
online. 
 
8 OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH 
THE EUROPEAN UNION 
We believe Brexit was and continues to be 
fundamentally destructive for the UK as a 
whole. For Northern Ireland, it poses huge 
challenges for our economy, environment, 
society and wider political stability. 
We support the special arrangements 
provided for under the Windsor Framework 
but we want to improve its implementation to 
help people and businesses in NI. 
We want: 
•
A negotiated Veterinary Medicines 
Agreement and a grace period for the next 
phase of goods labelling in the interim. 
•
Improved information and assistance to 
businesses based in Great Britain regarding 
trading in NI. 
•
Early and enhanced engagement between 
Northern Ireland’s elected representatives, 
Executive departments and other 
stakeholders in the development of EU law. 
 
9 INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
AND DEFENCE 
International cooperation is essential in 
addressing shared global challenges. Alliance 
is guided by our liberal internationalist values 
and our commitment to the rules-based 
international order. 
The world is an uncertain place, faced with 
many challenges. With these principles in 
mind, Alliance will: 
•
Work towards a two-state solution in the 
Middle East, based on international law. 
This includes the recognition of Palestine as 
a sovereign state and an end to the illegal 
occupation of Gaza and the persecution of 
Palestinians in Israel and the Occupied 
Palestinian Territories. 
•
Continue in our support for Ukraine’s fight 
for freedom against Russian aggression 
and for the ongoing provision of aid to 
Ukraine. 
•
Push to reinstate the Department for 
International Development and for 
spending on Official Development 
Assistance of 0.7% of the UK’s gross 
national income.
LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
PAGE 7
INSTITUTIONAL REFORM                                                       8 
NORTH-SOUTH AND EAST-WEST COOPERATION                 10 
SHARED FUTURE                                                                  10 
DEALING WITH THE PAST                                                     11
CHAPTER 1 
LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
PAGE 8
LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
Northern Ireland has transformed in many 
ways since the Good Friday Agreement. Our 
politics, economy, and society have all 
evolved, and we’ve witnessed significant 
demographic change. 
Yet Northern Ireland has not been able to 
reach its full potential, held back by the 
failings of and within our political institutions. 
Political division has led to poor outcomes on 
some issues, and complete deadlock on 
others. Our system of government has 
increasingly become marred by a lack of 
openness and accountability and is often 
characterised by populism and cronyism. 
Particular concerns include: 
•
Institutional sectarianism, in particular, the 
designation and related voting system in 
the Assembly. 
•
The politics of ‘them’ versus ‘us’ over 
control of territory and resources rather 
than any consideration of a shared vision 
and common goals for Northern Ireland. 
•
Mutual vetoes granted to the largest 
parties in the Executive, which are 
undemocratic and destablising. 
•
Lack of incentivisation of co-operation, 
moderation and accommodation, with 
hardline and exclusionary politics rewarded. 
•
Departmental silos, with insufficient 
joining-up across government and a lack of 
collaboration on cross-cutting issues. 
 
Every government needs to work on the basis 
of trust, respect, and partnership. There also 
needs to be a shared understanding of the 
common good, a commitment to cohesion, 
and adherence to collective responsibility. 
However, the nature and design of the 
institutions and mechanisms of government 
currently magnify disagreement and 
disincentivise cooperation and progress. 
Alliance is committed to stable and 
sustainable power-sharing that respects 
liberal, democratic principles and which 
supports a shared future. 
 
1.1 INSTITUTIONAL REFORM 
Northern Ireland deserves a working 
Assembly and Executive. Institutions that 
function in between periods of stop-start 
government are not good enough. 
In 1998, the Good Friday Agreement provided 
us with a mechanism to manage divisions. Its 
success is demonstrated powerfully in the 
growing number of people who now reject the 
binary, divisive “two communities” model and 
instead embrace the concept of a pluralist, 
shared community, rich with diversity. This 
transition, evident in surveys and census data 
for some time, is now impacting the political 
sphere with a record number of MLAs elected 
in the most recent Assembly election who are 
not defined as either unionist or nationalist. 
Despite that change, the architecture of the 
GFA continues to afford additional rights and 
privileges to those who remain wedded to 
binary politics at the expense of stability and 
progress and to the detriment of other 
minorities. 
The continuing cycle of restoration and 
collapse proves that the institutions are 
fundamentally unstable. This impacts their 
effectiveness and, in turn, the extent to which 
they can serve the people of Northern Ireland. 
Alliance remains committed to the principles 
and spirit of the Good Friday Agreement, but 
believe its structures were meant to evolve. 
Notwithstanding the recent restoration of the 
Assembly and the Executive, reform remains 
essential for cohesion, fairness, and stability in 
Northern Ireland. The lessons from recent 
history reinforce this.  
We will defend the Good Friday Agreement 
against the potential threats posed by the UK 
leaving the European Convention on Human 
Rights (ECHR) and through the pursuit of 
further divergence from the EU. 
Reform must not be left to the Northern 
Ireland political parties alone. Rather, the UK 
and Irish governments must lead and drive 
reform through their roles as co-guarantors of 
the Good Friday Agreement. 
We believe both immediate and medium-term 
reforms are necessary. We see the immediate 
changes required as falling under three broad 
strands: 
1
To facilitate Executive formation, the 
process of nominating First and deputy 
First Ministers must be amended. If the 
largest party eligible to nominate the First 
or deputy First Minister is unwilling to do 
so, the entitlement should pass to the next 
largest party, creating the ability for those 
willing to nominate to do so. 
2
To facilitate a functional Assembly, a 
weighted majority should replace parallel 
consent in “cross-community” votes. This 
should be a majority of approximately two-
thirds of the whole Assembly, with the 
precise figure to be determined after each 
election to ensure it includes unionists, 
nationalists and others. Without this, the 
Executive may not be able to pass a 
budget and the Assembly may be unable 
to elect a Speaker. Further, the petition of 
concern mechanism should be reformed, 
restricting its use to the small number of 
issues it for which it was originally 
intended. Once triggered successfully, 
votes should proceed by weighted 
majority. 
3 To facilitate a functional Assembly, the 
threshold for triggering a “cross-
community” vote within the Executive 
should also be raised to reflect the reforms 
proposed to the petition of concern in the 
Assembly, used only on key issues; in 
addition, the “three meeting convention” 
for adding items to the Agenda should be 
placed on a statutory footing. 
In the medium-term, we recommend the 
following measures: 
1
The titles of both ‘First Minister’ and 
‘deputy First Minister’ are changed to ‘Joint 
First Minister’, acknowledging their offices 
are co-equal. 
2
The positions of ‘Joint First Ministers’ be 
counted against D’Hondt calculations. 
3 The system of designations be abolished. 
4 Arrangements for an Executive to be 
formed through a voluntary coalition 
should be put in place. 
 
Full details of our proposals for institutional 
reform can be found in our paper, Sharing 
Power to Build a Shared Future. 
 
LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
PAGE 9
1.2
NORTH-SOUTH AND 
EAST-WEST COOPERATION 
Strands Two and Three of the Good Friday 
Agreement mandate cooperation between 
Executive Ministers and their counterparts in 
the Republic of Ireland and across the UK. 
Whilst this cooperation is welcome, we believe 
it should be greatly enhanced. 
Northern Ireland is entirely interconnected 
with Ireland and the UK. Yet, the Strand Two 
and Three institutions receive much less 
attention than those of Strand One, and their 
scope lacks the breadth and depth that is 
required for meaningful cooperation. 
 
North-South 
The Strand Two institutions have served as an 
early warning system ahead of political 
collapse, with withdrawal from or the 
frustration of the North-South Ministerial 
Council (NSMC) often indicating the 
beginnings of a political crisis that will 
ultimately affect Strand One institutions. 
We believe there is significant scope for 
enhanced practical cooperation around 
economic, social and environmental areas, and 
these opportunities for cooperation are 
underserved by the NSMC. The NSMC needs 
more dynamic engagement and a substantive 
work programme, including on the integrated 
single energy market and on areas that have 
changed due to Brexit. For example, the 
Windsor Framework covers only the 
movement of goods into the Single Market 
but doesn’t cover freedoms for services, 
capital and the free movement of people. 
These are areas in which the NSMC could 
meaningfully drive cooperation and 
collaboration. 
There is currently an effective veto on NSMC 
meetings, whereby a Unionist or Nationalist 
Minister failing to agree to attend affects its 
‘balance’ and can, therefore, prevent the 
meeting from taking place. This arrangement 
highlights the pervasive nature of vetoes 
within our political institutions and should be 
removed. 
 
East-West 
Whilst its origins lie in the desire for a new 
devolved administration in Northern Ireland to 
build relationships with both governments, the 
British Irish Council should now have a much 
wider role in enhancing and managing British-
Irish relations and providing a forum for 
governments across these islands. This 
potential has not yet been realised, and post-
EU Exit, it is more important than ever. 
There are opportunities to further develop 
cooperation in areas such as energy, the 
environment, public health, education, trade, 
and transport. 
The British-Irish Intergovernmental 
Conference has not met consistently, which 
has impacted on its success in developing 
cooperation between the UK and Irish 
governments. 
Alliance believe that free movement and 
reciprocal rights under the Common Travel 
Area should be preserved and enhanced. This 
is explored in further detail in the section on 
Migration. 
 
1.3
SHARED FUTURE 
The Alliance Party vision is of a shared future 
where everyone is safe, can make a positive 
contribution and is treated fairly and with 
respect. We believe in a society for everyone, 
underpinned by our shared values of equality, 
respect for diversity and interdependence. 
We reject the notion of “two communities” 
and instead believe a shared future will enable 
us to build a stronger Northern Ireland, 
making it a more attractive place to live, learn, 
work, and invest. This will also allow us to save 
resources by investing in services for everyone 
and ensure better public services for all. 
We believe the UK Government should help 
build a shared future in Northern Ireland by: 
•
Funding research to fully cost economic, 
social and financial divisions in Northern 
Ireland. The Executive should use this to 
inform their work, factoring the cost of 
division into departmental decision-
making, including capital investment, and 
agreeing an action plan to dismantle it. 
PAGE 10
LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
•
Creating a successor fund to the Fresh 
Start capital fund for shared and integrated 
education. This should encompass the 
remaining integrated school projects that 
lost out on Fresh Start funding and should 
also expand to include investment in early 
years and early intervention. This fund 
would be transformative in its scope and 
should be collaborative in nature and 
focused on shared outcomes through 
trauma-informed projects. As with Fresh 
Start, this would be additional to other 
funding streams such as PeacePlus and 
from philanthropic funding. 
•
UK Government departments operating in 
Northern Ireland should uphold their 
equality duties as outlined in section 75 of 
the Northern Ireland Act 1998. This should 
also extend to capital spending decisions. 
 
1.4
DEALING WITH THE PAST 
Legacy Act 
Alliance has long campaigned for truth, justice 
and support services for victims and survivors 
of the Troubles. We have long held that the 
following principles should guide all proposals 
to deal with the legacy of the conflict: 
•
Promoting reconciliation. 
•
Upholding the rule of law. 
•
Acknowledging and addressing the 
suffering of victims and survivors. 
•
Facilitating the pursuit of justice and 
information recovery. 
•
Complying with human rights. 
•
Proportionality, fairness, transparency and 
equity. 
 
We believed that the proposals contained 
within the Stormont House Agreement 
adhered to these principles and provided a 
sound path to progress for those seeking 
truth, justice and acknowledgement. 
Unfortunately, after years of delay, the UK 
Government recommitted itself to the 
Stormont House Agreement proposals in 
January 2020, only to abandon them within 
weeks. 
The new Legacy Act was driven by internal 
Conservative politics and perceptions of what 
veterans wanted, rather than the best interests 
of victims and survivors and Northern Ireland 
society. It represents a betrayal of previous 
political agreements and is at odds with the 
rule of law, justice, and reconciliation. 
It has no legitimacy, having been foisted on 
the people of Northern Ireland without their 
support. It defies the views of stakeholders, 
including political parties, human rights 
experts, and victims’ groups. 
Justice should have no time limit, and the 
criminal justice system should always be 
available to those who seek to use it. The 
ruling of the High Court in Northern Ireland 
around the central immunity clause is 
welcome, and we await the outcome of the 
Irish Government’s interstate case. 
We will advocate for the replacement of the 
Legacy Act with an alternative co-designed 
with local political parties and victim and 
survivors’ groups. 
 
Victims and Survivors 
We have long supported the introduction of a 
pension for victims and survivors of the 
Troubles, and Justice Minister Naomi Long 
MLA took the lead in implementing the 
Troubles Permanent Disablement Pension 
Scheme when other executive ministers 
refused. 
The August 2024 deadline for backdated 
applications should be extended to allow 
victims and survivors the time to access 
support in completing their applications and 
to allow the Victims’ Payment Scheme to 
manage the flow of applications. 
We support the campaign for a payment for 
those bereaved during the Troubles, and we 
welcome the scoping work being undertaken 
to establish the best way forward. 
 
LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
PAGE 11
PAGE 12
UK PUBLIC FINANCES
IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES, ECONOMY AND CLIMATE    13 
FISCAL RULES REFORM                                                       13 
TAXATION, PENSIONS AND WELFARE SUPPORT                  14 
CHILDCARE                                                                          16 
NORTHERN IRELAND PUBLIC FINANCES                              16
CHAPTER 2 
UK PUBLIC FINANCES
UK public finances are in a difficult space – 
Public Sector Net Debt is at a level last seen in 
the early 1960s. This is after over a decade of 
damaging austerity initiated by the UK 
Government to address the post-2008 
financial bailout and associated debt 
overhang. Covid-related expenditure has since 
contributed to debt levels, and there is no 
obvious way out of this precarious financial 
position under current Treasury rules. 
The Truss/Kwarteng Mini Budget 
compounded the situation by undermining 
trust and credibility in the UK Government 
and causing underlying interest rates to spike; 
they remain elevated as a result. This has had 
the dual effect of increasing borrowing costs 
for the UK Government and homeowners and 
businesses – many households are still to feel 
these impacts when they reach the end of 
fixed-rate mortgage deals. 
Realistically, future economic and financial 
shocks are highly probable, particularly given 
rising global geopolitical tensions. Public 
sector debt levels will continue to face 
pressure from emerging crises, and the UK 
Government must unravel the conflict that this 
creates in terms of financing essential public 
services and investing in the future. 
 
2.1
IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES, 
ECONOMY AND CLIMATE 
In this fiscal climate, our public services have 
been squeezed beyond recognition. Health 
waiting lists are rising, school budgets are 
inadequate to meet needs, and there is 
insufficient funding for key areas of public 
concern, such as the economy, policing and 
justice, and environmental protection. Without 
reform, public services will continue to decline 
and decay at the expense of societal well-
being, and our economic and environmental 
future. 
The UK economy continues to underperform. 
Brexit has caused further challenges, and the 
additional resultant trade barriers to the UK’s 
largest market have hindered growth 
significantly. 
The UK is also facing significant environmental 
risks. There are enormous costs associated 
with climate inaction. Recent research 
suggests that this will cost the global 
economy £30 trillion per year by 2049. Huge 
economic and social impacts are currently 
accruing and are not actively factored into 
political decision-making. 
Significant investment is required to offset this 
decline in public services and to mitigate 
economic and environmental risks. Alliance 
believes that there is a potential solution to 
the public funding/debt deadlock and that it 
lies in fundamental reform of elements of the 
UK’s fiscal framework – specifically, Fiscal 
Rules. 
 
2.2
FISCAL RULES REFORM 
We know that fiscal discipline is vital in 
protecting the UK’s credit rating and the 
associated costs of servicing public sector 
debt. Fiscal Rules – essentially the spending 
discipline that the Government observes to 
ensure that expenditure is responsible, 
sustainable, and not unduly subjected to 
political short-termism – are extremely 
important in ensuring financial stability. 
However, there is an emerging argument that 
these Fiscal Rules are too restrictive and, as 
such, are constraining investment, economic 
growth and environmental protection. 
Alliance believes that this argument is 
particularly pertinent in relation to 
expenditure on the environment. The UK’s 
current fiscal framework does not adequately 
reflect future costs associated with 
environmental inaction, which, as quantified 
above, runs into trillions of pounds annually. 
The disconnect between political short-
termism and the inherently future-orientated 
impact of environmental spending needs to 
be better identified and mitigated in public 
spending decisions. 
Alliance believes reforming the Fiscal Rules 
could unlock significant investment, including 
for a Green New Deal – see Chapter 4 for 
more information. This could be funded via 
long-term bond issuance in addition to 
existing UK Green Gilts. Without such reform, 
UK fiscal policy is reinforcing relative climate 
inaction and storing up environmental, social 
and financial crises for the future. 
UK PUBLIC FINANCES
PAGE 13
PAGE 14
UK PUBLIC FINANCES
On this basis, Alliance believes there is scope 
to unlock additional expenditure at a UK 
Government level, including for NI. This can be 
done in a fiscally prudent manner to prevent 
unintended consequences regarding financial 
market reactions and underlying interest rates. 
This would necessitate strategic targeting of 
associated expenditure in areas that will 
mitigate the – as yet not fully captured – costs 
of environmental inaction and would add to 
the future value of the UK’s natural 
environment, economy and wider 
infrastructure. 
We believe that UK Fiscal Rules should 
recognise the impact of spending on UK 
Government’s overall asset base in terms of 
broader economic infrastructure, natural 
resources and the quality of our environment 
– not merely the impact on debt and deficit, 
as is currently the case. If public sector 
spending creates additional net wealth, albeit 
on the basis of interim debt incurrence, then it 
could and should be deemed fiscally prudent. 
Significant climate and environmental 
expenditure would also provide enhanced 
cover for households and businesses in terms 
of ongoing geopolitical risks and shocks, and 
the threat that this presents in terms of 
energy price fluctuations, and the impact on 
the cost of living/doing business. A greener 
and more energy-efficient infrastructure 
would reduce exposure to oil and gas price 
shocks and be a sound investment for 
households and businesses alike. 
We believe this investment is also key to 
addressing many of the deficiencies in the 
overall UK and NI economies at present. 
Strategic, targeted investment could unlock 
new skills, jobs and technologies. This would 
also address stalled investment levels in the 
UK – which are constraining growth – 
providing a stable policy outlook and 
unlocking additional private sector 
investment. 
Alliance will continue to advocate for reform 
of the Fiscal Framework on a strategic and 
fiscally prudent basis, to benefit public 
services, the economy and the environment. 
We firmly believe this would unlock much-
needed funding for NI and enable us to invest 
in public services and our future prosperity. 
 
2.3
TAXATION, PENSIONS 
AND WELFARE SUPPORT 
As set out above, Alliance believes there is a 
credible case for increasing the total quantum 
of funding available to the UK Government for 
strategic expenditure via a revised fiscal 
framework. Two other core components of the 
net funding envelope, namely taxation and 
welfare support, are determined by UK 
Government Fiscal Policy, and have huge 
implications on household wellbeing in 
Northern Ireland. 
 
Taxation 
Alliance maintains that there is potential for a 
fairer, more redistributive system without any 
additional tax being levied on ordinary 
working households. We believe the current 
UK taxation policy fails to adequately capture 
and reflect wealth and should be revised to 
ensure a more progressive tax system. 
Loopholes in the tax system accommodate 
significant tax avoidance for the super-
wealthy. 
Increasing tax on the super-wealthy would 
allow for increased personal income tax 
allowances, providing much-needed relief for 
hard-working individuals/households – many 
of whom have been subjected to fiscal drag 
over recent years due to inflation-linked pay 
increases, which, in fact, leave them worse off 
in net income terms. 
We believe there is scope for a shift in 
taxation related to environmental protection, 
including carbon taxes. Evidence suggests 
that sectors in which environmental taxes 
have been becoming more onerous – industry, 
power generation and waste – have been 
successful in reducing emissions, whereas 
sectors with more stable taxation, such as 
aviation and transport, have made much less 
progress. 
We would therefore support enhanced 
taxation in these areas, provided it is phased 
and proportionate, implemented in a manner 
that is progressive for consumers and 
minimises any unintended disruption to 
business activity and investment intentions. It 
is also our preference that, where 
environmental taxes are levied, there is a clear 
linkage with investment in environmental 
improvement and tackling climate change. 
We would also like to see a tax on share 
buybacks, as has recently been implemented 
in the US, to incentivise productive business 
investment, support the transition to net zero 
and raise much-needed public funds for 
investment in public services. These buybacks 
occur when huge corporations use their 
profits to inflate their own share price – 
usually this involves oil and gas giants and big 
banks; the same corporations who are 
profiting the most from the cost-of-living 
crisis. It is estimated that a tax on share 
buybacks would raise around £1.4bn per year. 
 
Pensions 
Alliance is committed to protecting UK State 
Pensions, including keeping the Triple Lock. 
The current levels of state pension provisions 
in the UK are relatively low by European 
standards. 
Alliance believes auto-enrolment in workplace 
pensions is a key tool in ensuring people have 
a dignified retirement. We are committed to 
implementing a range of improvements in the 
auto-enrolment system, including lowering the 
age for automatic enrolment from 22 to 18, 
action to prevent the exclusion of low earners 
from auto-enrolment as a result of the current 
earnings trigger, and exploring options to 
default self-employed people into pension 
savings. 
To address the maladministration suffered by 
women born in the 1950s and affected by 
changes to the State Pension age, we support 
a compensation system that – in line with the 
WASPI campaign – is adjusted to reflect the 
extent of the change in the individual’s State 
Pension age and how much notice they 
received. 
 
Welfare Support 
The UK continues to face a very significant 
cost of living crisis, with many households – 
including both those with and without people 
in employment – struggling to meet the basic 
standard of living. The use of food banks 
continues to increase every year and 
pressures on households with children are 
particularly acute. 
Alliance will work to end to the callous 
approach to welfare reform, which has 
severely harmed low-income households. We 
support ending the Benefits Cap, Bedroom 
Tax and two-child limit on Child Benefit on a 
UK-wide basis. We also believe in a more 
empathetic approach to medical assessments; 
cessation of regular re-assessments for those 
with progressive or incurable conditions; the 
abolition of punitive sanctions and a renewed 
focus on skills development and training for 
those within the welfare system. 
A wealth of evidence has demonstrated the 
link between the two-child limit in Universal 
Credit and higher poverty rates among larger 
families, with a harsh impact on children. 
Scrapping the policy would be one of the 
most efficient ways of reducing child poverty 
across the UK. 
The five-week wait for initial Universal Credit 
payments is also leaving many claimants 
struggling to afford basic living costs and 
locked into a cycle of debt from the beginning 
of their UC journey. A wider review is needed 
to look at ways of making the Universal Credit 
system more flexible and responsive for new 
claimants. We also support the establishment 
of an Essentials Guarantee in the social 
security system, ensuring that people’s 
incomes cover the cost of living. 
Carer’s Allowance remains one of the lowest 
benefits of its kind in the entire welfare 
system. To better recognise the enormous 
contribution unpaid carers make to public 
services, Alliance supports the delivery of a 
Carer’s Allowance Supplement and extension 
of the Carer’s Allowance earnings threshold. 
We also support increases in support for 
maternity, paternity, shared-parental and 
adoption entitlements. 
 
UK PUBLIC FINANCES
PAGE 15
PAGE 16
UK PUBLIC FINANCES
2.4 CHILDCARE 
Families and households in Northern Ireland 
are currently suffering from a super-disparity 
in childcare support relative to those in other 
regions of the UK. Not only is this inequitable, 
but Alliance considers childcare to be key 
infrastructure that would allow us to unlock 
current and future economic potential, and we 
would urgently prioritise investment in 
childcare provision. 
We have proposed a bespoke model for 
Northern Ireland – an Affordable Childcare 
Scheme – that will deliver better outcomes for 
children, reduced costs for parents, and 
enhance the sustainability of childcare 
provision. 
We note the Northern Ireland Education 
Minister’s announcement that he aims to 
develop an interim scheme later in the year. 
This is welcome, and we recognise much of 
our own proposals in what the Minister has set 
out. However, Westminster also has a role to 
play. 
We are calling for: 
•
Improvements to the UK Government’s 
Tax-Free Childcare scheme such as a more 
user-friendly interface; increasing/removing 
the cap, and increasing the relief from 20% 
to 35%. 
•
Better information for parents on the types 
of childcare available, support with costs 
and the potential risks of using 
unregistered providers. 
 
You find can out more about our childcare 
policy and see our more comprehensive range 
of recommendations in Children First: 
Alliance’s Proposals for Child-centred and 
Affordable Childcare, published in October 
2023. 
 
2.5
NORTHERN IRELAND 
PUBLIC FINANCES 
The level of public finances available to NI 
underpins the Executive and Assembly’s 
capacity to sustain and transform public 
services such as health, education and justice, 
invest in public sector pay, drive the local 
economy, and protect our environment. 
 
Public Finances 
Alliance played a pivotal role in negotiating 
and securing the £3.3bn financial package in 
December 2023. During the period of 
collapse, we made numerous representations 
to the UK Government to flag the false 
economies associated with the neglect of 
public services and pay levels in Northern 
Ireland. We advocated for a financial package 
to stabilise and transform public finances and 
public services. 
Restoring our financial health will require 
stabilisation of the current financial crisis, and 
subsequent transformation of public spending 
to place public finances and services on a 
more sustainable footing. Northern Ireland 
cannot achieve better outcomes through 
continued cuts. Longer-term solutions are 
needed. 
Whilst welcome, the financial package that 
ultimately materialised from the UK 
Government fell far short of what was 
required and entirely failed to account for the 
funding gap in previous years. Northern 
Ireland’s public finances are in a perilous state, 
and essential public sector pay awards have 
largely subsumed any additional money for 
this financial year contained in the Treasury 
package. 
UK PUBLIC FINANCES
PAGE 17
Fundamentally, the core level of funding for NI 
is key for our economic, social and financial 
wellbeing. There is a credible basis to question 
whether Northern Ireland is adequately 
funded by the UK Government based on 
relative need. The Fiscal Council suggests that 
we have been structurally underfunded by 
between £300–£400m per year since 2022 
versus the level we would receive if an 
appropriate Fiscal Floor were in place. This is 
based on an assessment of relative need of 
124% in NI, i.e. for every £100 spent in 
England, £124 must be spent in NI to ensure 
equivalent funding based on relative 
underlying needs. 
Alliance believes that a Fiscal Floor of 124 
does not reflect our relative need in NI versus 
England. The current assessment of 124% is 
based on spending on policing and justice in 
the period from 2017-2022 (which has been 
used as a measure of related ‘need’). However, 
this period was characterised by continuing 
cuts to the Department of Justice budget, 
whereas the prior, ringfenced funding period 
from 2010-2015 was arguably more reflective 
of true policing and justice needs, as identified 
by the UK Government when the powers were 
first devolved. 
Alliance is committed to securing a base-lined 
fiscal floor, set at a level in excess of 124, as 
part of the next UK Spending Review. This 
process should be informed by external 
independent analysis. 
This historical underfunding continues to be 
compounded by significant inefficiencies in 
how money is spent in Northern Ireland, 
including the slow rate of reform in many 
areas and the distortions that come from 
trying to manage a divided society. Research 
by Ulster University in 2016 indicated that 
division in NI costs between £400m and 
£800m per annum. Alliance, of course, 
advocates inclusivity and a phased elimination 
of division. As referenced in chapter one, we 
believe the UK Government should fund new, 
comprehensive research into the updated cost 
of division in NI. 
Building on our Assembly Party Manifesto, in 
order to maximise the impact of the Northern 
Ireland budget, we believe four key areas of 
reform are needed: 
1
Reducing the costs of division. 
2
Reforming the public sector, including early 
intervention and protection. 
3 Improving budget setting and scrutiny 
processes. 
4 Reviewing existing and potential revenue 
raising options, and consideration of tax-
varying powers. 
 
For further details on what we would do in 
these areas, please see our 2022 Assembly 
Manifesto. 
 
Maximising Shared Island Funding 
Alliance also welcomes the Shared Island 
Funding, and the support it has provided to a 
broad range of projects in Northern Ireland 
over recent years. Alliance will explore with 
the Irish Government how this fund can be 
increased and deployed to further projects in 
a wider range of areas, where our shared 
challenges and solutions across the island 
would be enhanced by such investment. 
 
PAGE 18
NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY
CHANGING UK ECONOMIC POLICY                                       19 
SUPPORTING NORTHERN IRELAND’S ECONOMY                 20
CHAPTER 3 
NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY
NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY
PAGE 19
We believe Northern Ireland can become the 
most innovative and dynamic regional 
economy in Europe. Despite the challenges 
facing us, Northern Ireland has the capacity to 
become more competitive and outward-
looking. 
We must build on our emerging strengths in 
terms of fintech, cyber, pharma and the 
creative industries, while bolstering our 
foundation in advanced manufacturing, agri-
food, retail and hospitality. Within an open 
and market-based economy, businesses are 
the driving force behind employment and 
prosperity. 
However, we acknowledge that relatively low 
levels of productivity, skills gaps and 
mismatches, infrastructure gaps, labour 
market inefficiencies and high levels of 
economic inactivity all need to be addressed. 
Alliance will strive to exploit all trade and 
business services opportunities with other 
parts of the UK, on an all-island basis, with the 
wider EU and, indeed, globally. Of particular 
significance is how the UK rebuilds its 
relationship and more closely aligns with the 
EU. 
Our most recent Assembly Manifesto provides 
more details on Alliance’s priorities in the 
devolved space, including investment in skills, 
research and infrastructure, and reform of the 
planning system. 
 
3.1
CHANGING UK 
ECONOMIC POLICY 
The UK’s economic strategy is in need of a 
cohesive and comprehensive overhaul. In 
recent years, the UK economy has grappled 
with a host of challenges, from productivity 
levels and public and private investment to 
skills shortages and labour market inefficiency. 
The impact of Brexit, including increased 
trade barriers with the EU, our largest and 
closest market, has further hampered growth. 
It’s crucial to note that the UK economy is one 
of the most regionally unbalanced in Europe, 
with only 3 out of 12 regions contributing to 
the Treasury. 
In other sections of this manifesto, Alliance 
sets out our proposals for a Green New Deal 
and our relationship with the EU, both of 
which are central to the development of a new 
economic plan. 
In addition to those steps, the UK government 
can take many other measures to assist the 
Northern Ireland economy. Alliance MPs will 
work at Westminster to secure action from the 
UK Government to: 
•
Support regional industries by boosting 
research, innovation, skills, infrastructure 
and access to finance across the entire UK. 
•
Continue the development of broadband, 
high-speed mobile internet access and 
similar telecommunications projects in a 
manner that ensures all parts of the UK 
benefit from this technology. 
•
Support expansion of the British Business 
Bank & UK Infrastructure Bank to perform a 
strategic role in the local economy, 
ensuring that viable small and medium-
sized businesses have access to capital, 
including in relation to environmental and 
other investment with deferred returns. 
•
Establish a UK Export Fund for SMEs, to 
enable enhanced export orientation. 
•
Introduce a reduced rate of VAT for tourism 
and hospitality businesses. 
•
Create a legal duty on the UK Government 
to ensure its economic policies are 
assessed on their likelihood of reducing 
regional inequality in the economy and that 
levelling up is accelerated. 
•
Support ongoing delivery and expansion of 
City Deals for Northern Ireland. 
•
Seek introduction of Regional Rebalancing 
Programme for infrastructure spend across 
the nations and regions of the UK, with 
local and devolved authorities to be given a 
say in how it is used, reinforced by Just 
Transition funding for areas particularly 
affected by the transition to net zero 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
•
Seek expansion of Enhanced Investment 
Zone (EIZ) funding to focus on job creation 
and economic development in areas of 
innovative and sectoral strength. 
PAGE 20
NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY
•
Invest strategically to ensure that Northern 
Ireland has the skills and ability to attract 
greater levels of funding from projects such 
as UK Research Councils and meet 
emerging labour market skills demands. 
•
Establish renewed partnerships between 
Government and local businesses to 
formalise business representation, improve 
co-ordination and enable engagement 
North-South and East-West. 
•
Review investment levels in skills, the 
funding model for colleges, universities and 
apprenticeships and student finance for 
England – as revised outcomes may have 
beneficial outcomes for Northern Ireland. 
 
3.2
SUPPORTING NORTHERN 
IRELAND’S ECONOMY 
While the devolved institutions hold many 
economic policy levers, the UK Government 
has a crucial role to play. By working in 
collaboration with the Executive and 
Assembly, the UK Government can 
significantly bolster the Northern Ireland 
economy. 
 
NI Trade and Exports 
The UK Government has an important role in 
supporting exports from Northern Ireland, as 
well as ensuring UK trade deals do not have a 
detrimental effect on key NI industries, such 
as agrifood. This includes the appropriate 
inclusion of Northern Ireland businesses on 
trade missions and access to trade shows. 
Similarly, fair access to export finance must be 
ensured. However, there needs to be a clear 
distinction between the roles of the UK 
Government and Invest NI. 
We would support the development of a 
Memorandum of Understanding between the 
Department for Business and Trade and Invest 
NI to clarify and formalise those roles and 
linkages. 
 
Promoting Dual Market Access 
The Windsor Framework provides Northern 
Ireland with a relative opportunity compared 
to the rest of the UK that comes from 
unfettered access to both the market in Great 
Britain and the Irish/EU market in terms of 
goods. 
Alongside the Northern Ireland Executive and 
Invest NI, the UK Government must take 
action to promote this particular opportunity 
and avoid taking any steps or failing to keep 
EU law up-to-date that would undermine this 
comparative advantage. 
Alliance will hold the UK Government to 
account with regards to exploiting all 
opportunities associated with dual market 
access. 
 
Apprenticeship Levy 
The Apprenticeship Levy is collected from 
many Northern Ireland businesses; however, 
they do not receive any direct benefits from it, 
as the proceeds of the levy are collected by 
the UK Government and then reallocated to 
the Northern Ireland Executive’s Block Grant. 
Discontent regarding the Apprenticeship Levy 
has also been raised in Great Britain. 
Alliance will support a general review of the 
Apprenticeship Levy across the UK, and 
ensure that any levy raised from Northern 
Ireland is ring-fenced for re-investment in 
skills. 
 
NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY
PAGE 21
Defence Procurement 
Northern Ireland currently receives the lowest 
share per capita in the United Kingdom of 
defence contracts. 
Alliance will continue to lobby the Ministry of 
Defence to ensure that Northern Ireland-
based companies have proper opportunities 
to compete for contracts and that the local 
SME sector can access related opportunities 
in both Northern Ireland and Great Britain. 
 
Levelling Up and Shared Prosperity 
Alliance recognised the significant impact of 
the loss of EU funding to Northern Ireland, 
particularly the Structural Funds of the 
European Regional Development Fund and 
the European Social Fund. We are deeply 
concerned that the replacement funds, such 
as the Shared Prosperity Fund and other 
Levelling Up Funds are controlled by the UK 
Government, rather than aligned with 
devolved priorities and without requisite 
tailoring to local needs. 
There has been a significant reduction in 
funding to Northern Ireland, coupled with the 
imposition of unnecessary and costly bidding 
competitions, short-termism, uncertainty as to 
the areas of activity that will be supported, 
plus duplication in some areas and gaps in 
others. Many core services, including 
apprenticeship, labour market inclusion 
measures, disability employment, regeneration 
and economic development measures are in 
jeopardy. 
Alliance will seek a fundamental review of the 
design of Levelling Up and Shared Prosperity 
Funds to ensure they target the most 
impactful and sustained interventions and will 
continue to lobby for the resources and 
responsibility for these funds to be transferred 
to the Executive. 
 
PAGE 22
GREEN NEW DEAL
TACKLING THE ENERGY CRISIS                                           23 
KEY GREEN NEW DEAL COMMITMENTS                              24
CHAPTER 4 
GREEN NEW DEAL
GREEN NEW DEAL
PAGE 23
The climate crisis has existential implications 
for our planet and humanity. The world, and 
particularly the UK, is not on course to meet 
net-zero targets of the Paris Climate 
Agreement, which is considered the bare 
minimum to preserve a liveable planet. 
A Green New Deal recognises that tackling 
the climate emergency goes hand in hand 
with economic transformation and social 
justice. It’s about urgently decarbonising our 
economy, and in doing so, unlocking a fairer, 
more resilient economy filled with clean, 
affordable, renewable energy and well-paid, 
secure green jobs in existing and emerging 
industries. 
The impacts of climate change are already 
upon us, hitting the most vulnerable the 
hardest. We are experiencing increasing 
flooding, and changes in the natural 
environment, habitats and biodiversity. 
Extreme weather changes will only continue 
to accelerate, causing needless financial 
distress for households, businesses and public 
services if we don’t future-proof our 
infrastructure and meet net zero targets. 
As a Party, Alliance has long recognised that 
we need urgent action to overcome the 
climate crisis and improve our environment 
and economic wellbeing. 
This is why, in 2021, we developed the Alliance 
Green New Deal: our plan for a fair, green 
economy. 
Since we published the Alliance Green New 
Deal, energy prices and the cost of living have 
reached crisis point. The Conservatives have 
u-turned on critical climate pledges, recklessly 
approving fossil fuel expansion in the North 
Sea and failing to insulate the UK’s inefficient 
homes. 
Furthermore, over the past 15 years, the 
Conservatives have underinvested in our 
economy by over half a trillion pounds when 
compared to the G7 average, leaving our 
public services and infrastructure in desperate 
need of Green New Deal investment and 
transformation. 
Since the United Kingdom’s decision to leave 
the European Union, it is imperative that we 
reassess our progress in meeting our climate 
targets. It is worth noting that while the 
European Union continues to strengthen its 
climate legislation, the United Kingdom’s 
legislation is being weakened. We can no 
longer let this be the case. 
Alliance MPs will continue to demand that the 
UK Government puts in place a Green New 
Deal for the UK as a whole, in line with our 
Alliance Green New Deal policies. 
With Alliance MLA Andrew Muir now Minister 
for Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs, 
Alliance is leading climate action at every level 
of government. This includes working towards 
a specific Green New Deal for Northern 
Ireland by the Executive and the Assembly, 
which covers devolved responsibilities. 
 
4.1
TACKLING THE ENERGY CRISIS 
It has been estimated that as many as 45% of 
homes in Northern Ireland might now be living 
in fuel poverty. This is unacceptable. 
In today’s world of rapid change and precarity, 
we need affordable running costs for 
households and resilient infrastructure and 
public services that can adapt quickly and 
effectively to changing demands – a 
consideration that is increasingly vital, given 
emerging geopolitical risks and their 
associated impacts on the cost of living. This 
means a national plan for massive investment 
in renewables and properly insulating our 
homes. 
The initial expenses of overhauling our energy 
infrastructure can be covered through a mix of 
public and private investment, with increased 
taxes on the wealthiest individuals – i.e. the 
richest 1% of people in the UK with a total 
wealth of £2.8tn – helping to stabilise the 
economy. Reforming wealth taxes on the 
super-rich has been estimated to generate up 
to £50 billion annually. 
Although many energy powers are devolved 
to the Northern Ireland Executive, the 
renewable energy industry stands ready to 
bring incredible opportunities for Northern 
Ireland and should be championed by 
Northern Ireland’s MPs. 
 
PAGE 24
GREEN NEW DEAL
4.2 KEY GREEN NEW DEAL 
COMMITMENTS 
Alliance MPs will work in close collaboration 
with our Minister for Agriculture, Environment 
and Rural Affairs to demand the UK 
Government paves the most ambitious and 
just path possible to Net Zero. 
We will build on our work holding the UK 
Government to account to meet, and where 
possible exceed, international climate 
commitments, by implementing a 
comprehensive climate action plan for the UK. 
This includes, but is not limited to: 
•
Embedding environmentalism at the heart 
of planning and delivery, at every level of 
Government. 
•
Ending the use of fossil fuels, banning 
fracking and the opening of new coalmines 
and pits, and replacing fossil fuels with 
renewable energy. 
•
Upholding Net Zero goals and opposing 
destructive policy rollbacks from the 
Conservative Government, including 
reversing new oil and gas licences. 
•
Demanding tax increases on fossil fuel 
giants, and wealth and property taxes on 
the super-rich to create equity in the tax 
system and support the transition to Net 
Zero and an end to fuel poverty. 
•
Creating of a “wealth tax” for the top 1% of 
UK earners who are responsible for 26 
times the carbon emissions of the bottom 
10%. 
•
Funding a Green New Deal via long term 
bond issuance, ISAs and Pension Funds. 
•
Requiring the UK Government to change 
current approaches to spending and 
taxation. See more on this in our Finance 
chapter. 
•
Enhancing collaborative relationships 
between UK Government and devolved 
administrations in relation to climate policy. 
•
Ensuring UK Government recognises 
transboundary issues in relation to 
agriculture and the environment, including 
in relation to marine plan. 
•
Strengthening the powers of the Groceries 
Code Adjudicator to ensure fair trading 
practices for farmers. 
•
Ensuring adequate funding for Agriculture, 
Rural Affairs and Fisheries sectors to 
enable a genuine just transition. 
•
Calling for enhanced funding for the Office 
of Environmental Protection to ensure 
adequate enforcement and on ground 
presence. 
•
Ensuring Northern Ireland receives its fair 
share of funding raised under the UK’s 
Emissions Trading Scheme. 
•
Scrutinising every UK-wide energy package 
to ensure it prioritises renewable energy 
and acts to keep prices as low as possible. 
•
Continuing the development of the UK Net 
Zero Carbon Buildings Standard and 
supporting a UK-wide emergency 
programme to reduce energy consumption 
from all buildings, including providing 
insulation to cut emissions and fuel bills, 
retrofitting homes and increasing energy 
efficiency of private rented sector homes 
and social housing, ultimately ending fuel 
poverty for good. 
•
Introducing UK air quality limits in line with 
World Health Organisation levels to 
guarantee and monitor the right to breathe 
clean air both indoors and outdoors. 
•
Supporting the continued existence of the 
all-island energy market, and ensure its 
continued effective operation despite the 
ongoing changes around implementation 
due to the Protocol and Windsor 
Framework. 
•
Securing research and development 
investment in Northern Ireland to match 
other UK regions, realising Northern 
Ireland’s potential as a leader in green 
innovation. 
GREEN NEW DEAL
PAGE 25
•
Establishing citizens’ assemblies to work 
alongside the UK Government, under the 
Parliament’s scrutiny, to ensure that a just 
and democratic transition involves all of us, 
especially those most affected. 
•
Strengthening just transition principles 
through expanding the UK’s climate 
disclosure regulations to require every UK 
listed company to make just transition 
plans and to involve their workforce and 
trade unions in this planning. 
•
Scrapping the Conservatives’ anti-protest 
laws to support trade unions’ right to 
organise and advocate during the just 
transition. 
•
Banning advertising for high-carbon 
products. 
 
Animal Welfare 
In addition to protecting biodiversity, wildlife 
and habitats, Alliance has always prioritised 
animal welfare and sought to tackle cruelty 
against animals. People who show such 
brutality are not only a danger to the animals 
involved but potentially to our society as a 
whole. 
We will continue to pursue high welfare 
standards at the UK level and to use the UK’s 
influence to end global “trophy hunting” and 
the trade of illegal animal products. We 
remain committed to extending the ban on 
hunting mammals with dogs to Northern 
Ireland. 
 
PAGE 26
MIGRATION
REFORMING THE VISA SYSTEM                                            27 
OVERHAULING THE ASYLUM SYSTEM                                  28 
PROTECTING THE COMMON TRAVEL AREA                         29
CHAPTER 5 
MIGRATION
MIGRATION
PAGE 27
Alliance believes in a shared and united 
community. That means representing 
everyone in Northern Ireland, celebrating our 
community’s diversity, and upholding the 
rights and dignity of all. 
Migration is a normal part of human life: it 
enriches our culture, opens our minds, causes 
love and families to grow, and significantly 
improves our economy. 
Immigration must be managed, but Alliance 
supports a compassionate, fair system and we 
have always opposed the ‘hostile 
environment’. We believe that an immigration 
system can both fulfil our legal and moral 
responsibilities and at the same time grow our 
economy and improve our society. 
The Conservative Party has used Brexit as a 
vehicle to introduce an increasingly punitive, 
cynical immigration system that has 
threatened the rule of law, human rights, our 
economy and the UK’s international standing. 
The UK Government has perpetuated divisive 
mistruths and anti-migrant tropes, defying 
international law as well as the overwhelming 
economic evidence and needs of businesses. 
It has also failed to provide community 
resources for integration and created an 
unprecedented backlog in processing 
applications. 
Northern Ireland’s key sectors include retail, 
hospitality and tourism, agri-food and social 
care – all of which rely upon migrant workers. 
Since 2019, Northern Ireland businesses have 
experienced major job shortages due to the 
Government’s increasingly restrictive 
approach to economic migration. 
While immigration policy is set at 
Westminster, we also believe there is scope to 
use devolved powers to boost integration and 
strengthen migrant and asylum seekers’ rights 
in Northern Ireland. More information on these 
policies can be found in the Alliance 2022 
Assembly Manifesto. 
 
5.1
REFORMING THE VISA SYSTEM 
The Conservative Government has hiked up 
visa fees, increased qualification requirements 
and doubled the minimum salary levels to be 
eligible for a visa to work in the UK. Given 
lower salary levels in Northern Ireland, the 
impact of this policy has been particularly 
acute for local families. It has devastated and 
separated couples and families, led to major 
job shortages, and left untold numbers 
vulnerable to exploitation. 
Alliance MPs will campaign for changes so 
that our economy and businesses can thrive, 
families can be together, and all of us can live 
and work in dignity. We will support action to: 
•
Reverse the increased minimum threshold 
salary requirements for family visas and 
make the system affordable. 
•
Scrap the ban on dependents for those on 
a Health and Care Worker visa and student 
visa. 
•
End punitive, unjust policies such as No 
Recourse to Public Funds. 
•
Cut extortionate visa fees and make visa 
renewals automatic and affordable. 
•
Repeal the Immigration Act 2020 to scrap 
the shortage occupation list and points-
based system, creating a visa system based 
on the real needs of the Northern Ireland 
economy and society. 
•
End employer-dependent visas so workers 
can change jobs or leave an exploitative 
employer. 
•
Reject the assertion that workers in critical 
low-paid front-line roles are “low-skilled” 
and therefore ineligible to work in the UK. 
•
Cap routes to settlement at five years, and 
create a simplified route to status based on 
five years’ residence. 
•
Grant overseas students two years to find 
work after graduation. 
 
PAGE 28
MIGRATION
5.2
OVERHAULING THE 
ASYLUM SYSTEM 
The annual number of asylum applications to 
the UK peaked in 2002, and people who 
originally came to the UK seeking asylum 
make up a mere 0.6% of the UK’s total 
population. This small minority is not 
responsible for the systemic issues in our 
economy: the under-resourcing of our public 
services is. 
Under the current system, it is virtually 
impossible to seek asylum in the UK legally, 
and entering the UK via irregular journeys is 
the only way people can seek sanctuary. 
The UK therefore takes a tiny fraction of the 
world’s refugees. Most asylum seekers stay in 
the first country they feel safe. The small 
minority that travel onwards to reach the UK 
do so because they have ties to the country: 
familial, historical and language – some have 
even served with the British military, as is the 
case for many Afghan arrivals. 
Around 85% of refugees globally live in 
developing regions, with 73% of refugees 
living in countries neighbouring the one they 
have fled. 
Over recent years, smuggling gangs have 
capitalised on heightened border security 
between the UK and France and the UK’s 
departure from the EU. With fewer irregular 
journeys to claim asylum made by lorry and 
other vehicles, asylum seekers are forced to 
reach the UK via treacherous small boat 
crossings. 
The Conservative Government has spread the 
notion that people arriving on these boats are 
making bogus claims. In reality, 92% of small 
boat arrivals from 2018 to March 2023 claimed 
asylum, with over 86% of those who had 
received a decision by March 2023 being 
offered protection. 
The Conservative Government’s extreme 
approach to immigration is not based on 
evidence and does not stop people from 
entering the UK. Instead, it emboldens 
smuggling gangs and puts untold numbers at 
risk of death in the Channel, modern slavery, 
human trafficking and exploitation in the 
informal economy. In particular, Rwanda-style 
schemes are impacting people’s willingness to 
come forward as victims of human trafficking, 
and the inability to work is causing significant 
vulnerability to economic, sexual and criminal 
exploitation. 
The only meaningful way to reduce 
treacherous Channel crossings is to provide 
safe routes for asylum seekers to reach the UK 
and to expand the UK’s highly restrictive 
family reunification criteria. 
MPs will work to: 
•
Restore the universal right to seek asylum 
by repealing the Illegal Migration Act 2023, 
Nationality and Borders Act 2022, Safety of 
Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration) Act 
2024. 
•
Abolish the Rwanda Scheme and any other 
third-country forced resettlement 
agreements. 
•
Establish safe, legal routes to claim asylum 
in the UK, expanding resettlement schemes 
and making it easier for vulnerable family 
members to be reunited. 
•
Process asylum claims fairly and quickly in 
a trauma-informed way, without 
discriminating based on the method of 
travel. 
•
Grant asylum seekers the right to work in 
any job after three months so they can 
support themselves and their families and 
become active members of their 
communities. 
•
Call for more investment for communities 
to support asylum seekers and promote 
integration. 
•
End the use of hotels and privatisation of 
accommodation for those seeking asylum, 
moving to a not-for-profit-based system 
that’s integrated into communities and 
works alongside social housing. 
MIGRATION
PAGE 29
•
Make providers of asylum accommodation 
subject to a statutory duty to refer people 
leaving asylum support accommodation 
who are at risk of homelessness to the local 
housing authority. 
•
Ensure that migrants’ and refugees’ 
qualifications and prior learning are 
recognised to reflect need in the local 
economy and to ensure they can continue 
their education and find employment that 
corresponds to their skills. 
•
Explore options to strengthen and 
streamline community sponsorship. 
•
Call for adequate funding for the Northern 
Ireland Strategic Migration Partnership 
(NISMP) and improved governance across 
the UK. 
•
Establish independent monitoring of all 
accommodation provisions for those 
seeking asylum to ensure adequate health 
and safety precautions and safeguarding. 
•
Support a trial in Northern Ireland to 
explore community-based Alternatives to 
Detention (ATDs). 
 
5.3
PROTECTING THE COMMON 
TRAVEL AREA 
The Common Travel Area is a mixture of 
conventions and legal instruments that govern 
movement and reciprocal rights across the UK 
and Ireland. As a consequence of Brexit, it has 
been placed under growing stress. 
Furthermore, we have seen attempts to 
redefine the Common Travel Area (CTA) 
based exclusively around the rights of British 
and Irish nationals, resulting in unjust 
restrictions on migrant communities and 
reports of increasing racial profiling on cross-
border journeys. 
It is critical that the integrity of the Common 
Travel Area is upheld and that its rights are 
afforded to all those lawfully resident in the 
United Kingdom and in Ireland. In 
Westminster, Alliance MP Stephen Farry 
successfully secured an exemption for third-
party non-visa nationals living on the island of 
Ireland from the UK’s Electronic Travel 
Authorisation. 
The Irish and UK Governments must work 
together to protect residents’ CTA rights and 
make a positive case for immigration, showing 
that we can handle arrivals in a way that 
unlocks economic opportunities and fulfils 
international human rights responsibilities. 
Alliance MPs will work to ensure that: 
•
The Common Travel Area is placed on a 
formal treaty basis by the UK and Irish 
Governments. 
•
Essential cross-border services be made 
available to all legally resident non-EU/EEA 
citizens on the island of Ireland. 
•
Non-EU/EEA residents who have lawful 
residency in Northern Ireland are provided 
“deemed permission” to cross the border 
as visitors. 
•
A social mobility assessment is undertaken 
for migrant communities on the island of 
Ireland. 
•
The requirement for non-EU/EEA citizens 
to carry and produce passports when 
crossing the border and to notify 
authorities of their visit in advance of travel 
is abolished. 
•
An exemption for Northern Ireland tourism 
is created under the UK’s Electronic Travel 
Authorisation (ETA) scheme. 
•
A labour mobility scheme on the island of 
Ireland is created. 
 
PAGE 30
UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY
HUMAN RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES                                 31 
DEMOCRACY AT WESTMINSTER                                           31 
EQUALITY AND SOCIAL JUSTICE                                         32 
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENTS AND ONLINE SAFETY                  32
CHAPTER 6 
UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS 
AND EQUALITY
UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY
PAGE 31
Human rights, the rule of law and civil liberties 
have long been cornerstones of UK society. 
Yet since 2019, the Conservative Government 
has passed authoritarian legislation with 
increasing vigour, dangerously undermining 
fair process and democratic rights, and 
demonising refugees, workers and climate 
protestors. 
Just as Alliance stands for openness, honesty 
and fairness in Stormont, we will continue to 
seek to enshrine these values in Westminster. 
 
6.1
HUMAN RIGHTS AND 
CIVIL LIBERTIES 
Alliance believes human rights are inherent 
and universal: an essential part of modern 
governance that protects the individual from 
injustice. The Conservatives have repeatedly 
attempted to repeal the Human Rights Act 
and leave the ECHR, which would have 
devastating consequences for the rights of 
everyone across the UK. This would have 
particular implications for the Good Friday 
Agreement and specific areas such as policing 
and criminal justice. 
It is imperative that the next UK government 
restores the rule of law, civil liberties, and 
equal access to justice as foundational pillars 
of our society. 
Alliance MPs will demand the Conservatives’ 
draconian anti-protest laws be scrapped and 
the Illegal Migration Act repealed. 
 
6.2
DEMOCRACY AT WESTMINSTER 
The UK democratic system has long required 
significant reform. Many governments have 
been formed over past decades with a 
Parliamentary majority but with only the 
support of a minority of those who voted in 
proceeding elections. 
Norms and conventions of good behaviour 
have increasingly been flouted, frequently 
with impunity, including Ministers and others 
blatantly lying, failing to be transparent, or 
correcting the record. 
We cannot continue to rely on conventions to 
safeguard democracy and provide checks on 
executive power. Alliance has long supported 
constitutional change in the UK, and we 
believe that can no longer be delayed. 
Alliance MPs will continue to call for: 
•
A fairer electoral system for elections to 
the House of Commons. Our preferred 
system is multi-member Single 
Transferrable Vote, the system we use for 
all other elections in Northern Ireland. 
•
Votes at 16 for all elections and 
referendums. 
•
Votes for anyone legally resident in all 
elections and referendums. 
•
A directly elected House of Lords. Elected 
representatives could be elected by 
proportional representation from the 12 
regions of the UK, including Northern 
Ireland and would serve one or at most two 
longer terms to avoid party politicisation of 
the role. 
•
An extension of the ban on double-jobbing 
to include those sitting in the House of 
Lords or Seanad Éireann whilst elected to 
the NI Assembly. 
•
UK-wide constitutional convention to 
develop a fully codified constitution. This 
should explicitly deal with the democratic 
deficit in England following devolution in 
Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. 
•
Independent and transparent enforcement 
of the Ministerial Code. 
•
Making donations to political parties in 
Northern Ireland more transparent. 
Changes brought by Naomi Long in 
November 2013 ensured that all political 
donations were recorded from January 
2014 onwards. However, the Secretary of 
State for Northern Ireland chose only to 
publish those from July 2017 onwards, so 
we still have a period of secrecy, which 
needs to be addressed. 
•
Amending the 2014 Lobbying Act to ease 
restrictions on campaigning activities by 
affected organisations and to implement a 
comprehensive lobbying register. 
 
PAGE 32
UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY
6.3
EQUALITY AND 
SOCIAL JUSTICE 
In pursuing an agenda of undermining human 
rights, the Conservative Government has also 
failed to legislate on critical equality and 
social justice issues. 
Alliance MPs will continue to advocate for: 
•
An immediate trans-inclusive ban on so-
called Conversion Therapy, without 
loopholes, that extends to NI. 
•
The domestic incorporation of the UN 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (UNCRPD). 
•
The delivery of a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights to supplement the ECHR and 
Human Rights Act. 
•
A Royal Commission on drug policy to 
ensure we adopt evidence-based 
interventions, particularly in relation to 
harm-reduction. 
•
Urgent, just compensation for all those 
affected by the Infected Blood Scandal, 
including scrutinising the operation of the 
Government’s recently created Infected 
Blood Compensation Scheme. 
•
Introduction of a statutory Duty of 
Candour, which has been highlighted by 
the Hillsborough disaster investigations, the 
Post Office (Horizon) Scandal and others. 
•
Westminster to intervene when required to 
ensure the highest standards of rights and 
equality in Northern Ireland in line with 
international standards, where the 
Assembly or Executive manifestly fails to 
act. 
 
6.4 DIGITAL DEVELOPMENTS 
AND ONLINE SAFETY 
Developments in how we use technology have 
transformed our lives and our work over 
recent years. We believe there is enormous 
potential in both Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
in social media as forces for good; however, 
there are significant dangers if both are not 
properly regulated. 
The value of AI should be harnessed in a way 
that benefits society as a whole, whilst 
protecting human rights. The use of AI is 
increasing rapidly and has implications for 
almost every aspect of our lives: safety, 
democracy, work, the arts and the economy. 
Linked to this, social media is rapidly 
becoming a space in which people are at risk 
of harm, misinformation is endemic, and 
radicalisation can take hold. We are 
particularly concerned about the use of 
machine learning algorithms, the lack of 
accountability around anonymous accounts, 
and the effects of social media on children 
and young people, and vulnerable adults. We 
are also concerned that over-reliance on self-
regulation of social media platforms, results in 
varying standards of acceptable content and 
levels of due diligence in respect of breaches 
of standards and, consequently, inconsistency 
in whether and how harm is addressed in the 
online space. 
We believe the new Government should: 
•
Introduce a Digital Bill of Rights to protect 
everyone’s rights online, including the 
rights to privacy, free expression, and 
participation without being subjected to 
harassment and abuse. 
•
Incorporate the UN Convention on the 
Rights of the Child into UK law. 
•
Set up an independent advocacy body for 
children’s safety online. 
•
Build on the measures introduced through 
the Online Safety Act to introduce 
verification requirements for social media 
accounts.
OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION
PAGE 33
OUR POSITION ON BREXIT                                                  34 
IMPLEMENTING THE WINDSOR FRAMEWORK                      35 
FIXING THE UK-EU RELATIONSHIP                                      36
CHAPTER 7 
OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH 
THE EUROPEAN UNION
PAGE 34
OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION
Alliance was firmly opposed to Brexit, which 
continues to be fundamentally destructive for 
the United Kingdom as a whole. Most notably, 
it poses vast challenges for Northern Ireland’s 
economy, environment, society and wider 
political stability. 
In many respects, the story of the past eight 
years has been a series of attempts to 
reconcile the challenges and contradictions of 
Brexit for Northern Ireland, which depends on 
both north-south and east-west dimensions 
and can only operate successfully through 
sharing and interdependence. 
 
7.1
OUR POSITION ON BREXIT 
Successive attempts have been made to 
mitigate the impact of Brexit upon Northern 
Ireland through the Backstop, the Protocol, 
and the Windsor Framework. Whilst we 
helped devise many of these responses and 
welcome others, we recognise that some 
aspects of Brexit amount to a circle that 
cannot be entirely squared. Certain problems 
will either persist or not be fully solvable. 
Alliance believes that there is a hierarchy of 
responses to address Northern Ireland’s 
relationship with the EU. 
Alliance has always been open to maximising 
flexibilities within those special arrangements. 
Our tests remain: 
•
Protection of the Good Friday Agreement. 
•
Preservation of dual market access. 
•
Changes being mutually agreed between 
the UK and EU, and therefore legal. 
 
Alliance is committed to the ongoing 
continuance of the Windsor Framework in the 
forthcoming Democratic Consent vote which 
is scheduled before the end of 2024. 
Alliance will seek to exploit the relative 
opportunities that come from dual market 
access, whilst continuing to recognise the 
wider disadvantages and challenges posed to 
Northern Ireland by Brexit. 
Beyond the nature of the special 
arrangements for the region, broader steps 
can be taken to address the impact of Brexit 
upon Northern Ireland through to ultimately 
returning to the European Union. 
Most immediately, the more the UK and EU 
can improve their current relationship under 
the Trade and Co-operation Agreement, 
including alignment, then the easier the 
interface across the Irish Sea becomes and the 
softer the impact of Brexit overall. This should 
include consideration of rejoining the Single 
Market and Customs Union. 
It remains Alliance’s policy that Northern 
Ireland and the UK should return to the 
European Union at an early opportunity. 
Only a full reversal of Brexit can resolve all of 
the tensions, contradictions and limitations 
that it poses. 
 
OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION
PAGE 35
7.2
IMPLEMENTING THE 
WINDSOR FRAMEWORK 
Alliance broadly welcomes the Windsor 
Framework as a mitigation of some of Brexit’s 
impacts. However, we are clear that it remains 
an imperfect solution, with some issues still 
outstanding. We also note that it only 
addresses the movement of goods and fails to 
address the free movement of labour, services, 
and capital. 
Ultimately, closer alignment between the UK 
and the EU can reduce the need for some 
aspects of the Windsor Framework, and we 
are open to further negotiated, bilaterally 
agreed changes that can deliver improvement. 
Pending further changes, we will play our role 
in ensuring the implementation of 
international obligations. 
Alliance also recognises the importance of 
Article 2 in protecting rights under the Good 
Friday Agreement and the European 
Convention on Human Rights. We will 
continue to defend this from any attack. 
Whilst we acknowledge the positive intention 
of some of the measures within the 
Safeguarding the Union Command Paper, we 
remain concerned with the overall process 
and presentation, particularly its import for UK 
Government impartiality and balance with 
respect to Northern Ireland political parties. 
Furthermore, we are highly sceptical of the 
veracity of some of its claims. Alliance will, 
therefore, continue to scrutinise all underlying 
secondary legislation and its evidential basis 
robustly. 
Alliance is clear that there are key areas where 
further work with the EU is required to deliver 
improved implementation of the Windsor 
Framework, including: 
 
Veterinary Medicines 
The current Veterinary Medicines grace period 
ends on 31 December 2025. Whilst many 
pharmaceutical companies are planning at 
least 18 months in advance, we support a UK-
EU free trade Veterinary Medicines agreement 
to overcome issues and an extension of the 
grace period to facilitate the adoption of a 
mutually agreed position. 
 
Not for EU Labelling 
We are conscious of businesses’ major 
concerns regarding this measure and 
competing demands with respect to which 
approach should be taken. Particularly in light 
of our shared desire with other parties for a 
comprehensive UK-EU Veterinary Agreement, 
we will seek a grace period to defer the next 
phase of goods labelling pending such an 
agreement being concluded. 
 
‘At Risk’ Test 
The treatment of goods moving into Northern 
Ireland deemed at risk of moving into the 
European Union should remain under constant 
review to find opportunities to relax how this 
rule is interpreted and applied. 
 
GB-based Businesses 
Alliance will encourage the Government to 
take further tangible steps to inform and 
support businesses based in Great Britain 
regarding the requirements for doing business 
with Northern Ireland, and to promote the 
minimisation of trade friction between Great 
Britain and NI. 
 
North-South Mapping Exercise 
The Irish Government last conducted an 
exercise to assess the impact on north-south 
cooperation in 2019. Given developments 
since then regarding the nature and shape of 
Brexit and the particular solutions created for 
Northern Ireland, and its likely impact on areas 
such as skills, free movement and public 
services, the UK and Irish Governments should 
repeat this exercise collectively. This will help 
inform future policy responses. 
 
Democratic Deficit, Stormont Brake and 
Applicability Motions 
We are concerned about the nature and 
operation of the Stormont Brake and 
Applicability Motions. Both are blunt 
instruments that come at the end of the 
process of developing EU law. 
Significant uncertainty remains regarding how 
the UK Government will respond if the 
Assembly either pulls the Stormont Brake or 
fails to pass an Applicability Motion. 
Fundamentally, it is in Northern Ireland’s 
interests to remain aligned with the European 
Union on updated EU law and the adoption of 
new EU law. 
Northern Ireland’s elected representatives, 
departments and other stakeholders should 
seek to influence the development of relevant 
EU law much earlier in the process. Alliance 
will continue to develop such capacity and 
opportunities to influence outcomes. 
 
7.3
FIXING THE UK-EU 
RELATIONSHIP 
Brexit has had major consequences for the 
UK, including a lower rate of economic 
growth, upward pressure on costs and prices, 
greater labour shortages, border friction for 
imports and exports, and a loss of freedom of 
movement for professionals, students, and 
performers. 
The deteriorating geopolitical situation 
underscores the pressing need for the next UK 
Government to negotiate a closer, mutually 
beneficial relationship with the European 
Union. The scheduled review of the Trade and 
Co-operation Agreement during the next 
Parliament presents a focused opportunity, 
which, if seized, can bring about positive 
changes. 
Pending formal agreements with the 
European Union, it is still in the interests of the 
UK to voluntarily align with the European 
Single Market. 
Alliance was the first party to advocate a 
comprehensive UK-EU Veterinary or Sanitary 
and Phytosanitary (SPS) Agreement. This 
would be in the interests of the agri-food 
sector of Northern Ireland and the UK 
economy as a whole. Crucially, it would also 
significantly reduce the nature and level of 
related checks across the Irish Sea. 
Other areas that should be addressed include: 
•
Foreign policy and security co-operation. 
•
A progressive return to freedom of 
movement, starting with particular cohorts 
e.g. performers and a youth mobility 
scheme. 
•
Deeper policing and justice co-operation, 
dependent on ongoing adherence to the 
European Convention on Human Rights. 
•
Mutual Recognition of Professional 
Qualifications. 
•
Merging of UK and EU emissions trading 
regimes (ETSs) and Carbon Border 
Adjustment Mechanisms (CBAMs). 
•
Joint approach on chemicals. 
•
Rejoining EU agencies and programmes. 
•
Rejoining the Erasmus Plus programme so 
young people have full restored access to 
study, teach and volunteer abroad. 
 
PAGE 36
OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
PAGE 37
SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS                   38 
SUPPORT FOR THE ARMED FORCES                                   40 
DEFENCE SPENDING AND CO-OPERATION                         40 
GLOBAL JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT     41 
DEALING WITH PANDEMICS                                                42 
SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND POLITICAL FREEDOMS 43
CHAPTER 8 
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
PAGE 38
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
International co-operation is essential to 
addressing shared global challenges. Alliance 
is guided by our liberal, internationalist values. 
At present, the world faces its biggest range 
of inter-related challenges in many decades, 
with wars in Ukraine, the Middle East, and 
parts of Africa, and many tensions elsewhere. 
This is accompanied by situations of gross 
human rights abuses, humanitarian crises, 
growing numbers of displaced people, 
economic disruption, poverty and challenges 
in respect of development, pandemics and the 
climate emergency. 
The nature of the international community’s 
response to many of these problems, 
including some significant failings, has 
undermined international institutions and the 
international rules-based order more 
generally. 
Additionally, around the globe, liberal 
democratic structures are being challenged by 
the rise of populism and authoritarianism. 
 
8.1
SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL 
INSTITUTIONS 
Alliance reiterates its support for the central 
role of the United Nations and the wider 
family of institutions within the United Nations 
System and for the rules-based international 
order. This includes support for the work of 
the International Court of Justice and the 
International Criminal Court. 
 
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
PAGE 39
Conflict Resolution 
War and global conflict have a disastrous 
effect on international relations, economic 
stability, the environment, and public finances, 
and create human misery and destruction. 
As a result, Alliance supports: 
•
Military intervention only as a last resort. 
Any such interventions must be legal, have 
defined aims and an exit strategy, 
assurances that the result will be 
sustainable, and be accompanied by non-
military attempts at tackling the problem. 
•
The “Responsibility to Protect” doctrine. 
We accept that this must be a factor in 
decision-making about intervention. 
•
Reforming global institutions, including 
membership of the UN Security Council, to 
better promote globally agreed objectives 
and recognise the central role of the United 
Nations in maintaining global peace and 
security. 
 
Gaza 
The Middle East is one of the major fault lines 
in the world, with a long and troubled history. 
Hamas’s terrorist attacks on 7 October 2023 
were abhorrent, inexcusable war crimes that 
Alliance has consistently condemned in the 
strongest terms possible. Israel’s response 
from the outset has gravely and brazenly 
breached international humanitarian law, 
collectively punishing Palestinians and leaving 
people in Gaza in unspeakable, apocalyptic 
conditions. 
Since 9 October 2023, Alliance has 
consistently condemned war crimes 
committed by Israel and Hamas, demanded an 
immediate ceasefire, an end to the illegal 
siege, and the release of hostages and 
detainees. We have called out the UK’s blatant 
double standards in not challenging Israel’s 
breaches of international law and called for an 
end to arms exports to Israel. 
The Israeli Government’s acceleration of its 
illegal occupation and the intensification of 
subjugation of Palestinians in recent years has 
threatened the security of Palestinians and 
Israelis alike. 
Both the Israeli Government and Hamas must 
be held accountable for breaches of 
international law through the International 
Court of Justice and the International Criminal 
Court. This includes ending Israel’s 57 year 
occupation and 17 year blockade of Gaza, and 
dismantling the systematic discrimination of 
Palestinians in Israel and the Occupied 
Palestinian Territories that amount to the 
crimes against humanity of apartheid and 
persecution. 
We remain committed to a two-state solution 
based on existing international law, 
specifically upon UN Security Council 
resolution 242 (1967) lines. This includes the 
recognition of Palestine as a sovereign 
independent state. Peace in the region will 
come through Israel and Palestine both being 
safe, secure and prosperous inside 
internationally recognised borders. 
 
Ukraine 
Alliance fully supports Ukraine’s fight for 
freedom against Russian aggression. We have 
continuously advocated for immediate 
support for Ukrainians and the ongoing 
provision of military and other assistance to 
the country. Any solution must have the 
support of the Government and people of 
Ukraine. 
We will also support the most robust 
economic crime legislation that will prevent 
oligarchs from corrupt regimes from 
channelling their money through the UK. This 
would allow proceeds from the seizure of 
frozen Russian assets in the UK to be 
repurposed to support Ukraine. 
 
8.2
SUPPORT FOR THE 
ARMED FORCES 
Alliance respects and values the difficult work 
that our armed forces undertake. That is why 
we believe several changes must be made to 
ensure they are properly remunerated and 
rewarded for their efforts. 
This should include: 
•
An audit of the equipment and training 
provided to the armed forces to ensure 
that they are adequately prepared for the 
various types of missions that they face. 
This audit should ensure appropriate 
equipment for the changing natures of 
deployments. 
•
Provision of quality housing for armed 
forces personnel and their families. 
•
Supporting the continuing implementation 
of the Armed Forces Covenant in Northern 
Ireland, including regular monitoring of the 
scheme. 
 
8.3
DEFENCE SPENDING 
AND CO-OPERATION 
Alliance continues to support NATO as the 
cornerstone of the defence of the UK and 
Europe. 
We also advocate stronger defence co-
operation between the UK and the European 
Union and for a formal agreement to be 
reached early in this forthcoming Parliament. 
Alliance recognises the need for the UK and 
other countries to increase defence spending. 
We will support a full defence review in this 
regard. 
We believe that changing the UK’s defence 
posture can yield savings. Other approaches, 
reflecting the security challenges of the future 
rather than the nuclear standoff of the Cold 
War era, can be used to ensure the UK’s 
security. 
The UK can and should help combat nuclear 
proliferation by leading by example in 
reducing nuclear weapons as part of agreed-
upon multilateral efforts. 
 
PAGE 40
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
8.4 GLOBAL JUSTICE AND 
INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
Alliance believes that the UK has both a moral 
obligation and a strategic interest in 
international development spending. 
Countries in the Global South faced with 
geographical exposure, heightened levels of 
poverty, political instability, and exploitation of 
their natural resources are the most at risk 
from and least responsible for the climate 
emergency. 
As a result of climate change, experts 
estimate that between 25 million and 1 billion 
people could be forced to leave their homes 
by 2050. 
Industrialised nations such as the UK 
disproportionately bear responsibility for 
climate change. The UK’s global responsibility 
is compounded by ongoing funding of 
overseas fossil fuel projects, destabilising 
foreign policy decisions and its history of 
exploitation. 
The 2015 Paris Climate Agreement demands 
that high-income countries go further and 
faster in radically reducing emissions by no 
later than the “second half of this century”. It 
also requires governments to reduce 
emissions “on the basis of equity, and in the 
context of sustainable development and 
efforts to eradicate poverty.” Alliance MPs will 
demand that the UK upholds its international 
commitments and is as ambitious as possible 
when it comes to climate action. 
We want to build a fair, sustainable world: 
reducing poverty and inequality, addressing 
the climate crisis, and ensuring that the most 
marginalised groups, such as women, girls, 
people with disabilities and the LGBT+ 
community, are at the forefront of 
international development and humanitarian 
assistance policy. 
Therefore, Alliance will support: 
•
Reestablishing the Department for 
International Development (DFID) as a 
standalone department. 
•
Restoration of the commitment to spend 
0.7% of the UK’s gross national income on 
Official Development Assistance. 
•
Sustaining the UK’s pledge of £11.6 billion 
for climate finance over the five-year span 
from 2021/22 to 2025/26, ensuring that 
funds come from new and additional 
sources, not international aid or 
development budgets. 
•
An end to all fossil fuel expansion globally 
under the UNFCCC, phaseout all fossil fuels 
and support a just transition to renewables, 
with the richest, most historically polluting 
countries such as the UK moving fastest. 
•
NI and UK-based international 
development NGOs to continue to play a 
leading role in tackling poverty, mitigating 
against the impacts of climate change, and 
reducing violence around the world. 
•
The financing and delivery of the United 
Nations’ 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) and the commitment made by all 
UN member states to ‘leave no one behind’ 
by 2030. 
•
Tackling tax-dodging which harms the 
economies of both the UK and the Global 
South. 
•
The establishment of the new Loss and 
Damage Fund under UNFCCC, ensuring the 
UK pays its fair share and that fossil fuel 
companies pay towards loss and damage. 
•
Greater investment in water, sanitation and 
hygiene as a matter of priority. This not 
only reduces disease and improves 
sanitation but can help prevent the 
development of new diseases with a global 
threat, as well as impacting directly on 
economic growth and inclusion. Its impact 
on the safety, security, education, economic 
and social participation of women and girls 
is also hugely significant. 
•
The rights of small-scale farmers in the 
Global South to gain access to land, seed 
and finance, and uphold indigenous 
peoples’ right to land. 
•
Increasing focus on human security as 
defined by the United Nations 
Development Programme. 
•
An end to all aid spending on fossil fuel 
production overseas, redirecting it towards 
international climate aid. 
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
PAGE 41
•
Ensuring any trade deals are consistent 
with tackling climate injustice, rejecting any 
new trade deals which fail to maintain or 
enhance human rights and climate, 
environmental, food and farming standards. 
•
Prevention of environmental and human 
rights’ abuses in supply chains by 
establishing due diligence obligations on 
UK companies. 
•
A global climate change fund to help 
ensure that low-income countries can 
mitigate the impact of climate change and 
support international calls for 
compensation. 
•
UN efforts to introduce a binding 
international treaty on business and human 
rights, making companies legally 
accountable for failing to prevent human 
rights abuses or environmental damage in 
their operations and supply chains. 
•
The creation of much higher scrutiny and 
restrictions on UK arms exports, ending 
exports to countries that engage in 
aggression against others and repression 
domestically. 
•
The development of an ambitious UN 
Global Plastics Treaty to mitigate against 
plastic as a threat multiplier and reduce 
plastic-aggravated flooding in the Global 
South. 
•
Calls for the UK’s urgent ratification of the 
UN Global Ocean Treaty and support a ban 
on deep sea mining. 
 
8.5
DEALING WITH PANDEMICS 
Alliance believes that we must learn lessons 
from the recent COVID-19 pandemic to 
enhance the response to future disease 
outbreaks with pandemic potential. We must 
ensure that the health service and other key 
workers are better prepared and supported to 
meet the challenges of another pandemic. We 
will advocate for better global co-operation 
from the next UK Government to mitigate and 
manage outbreaks. 
We value expert scientific advice and believe 
that it should inform government policy to 
help protect the population’s health during 
outbreaks. 
 
PAGE 42
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
8.6
SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS 
AND POLITICAL FREEDOMS 
Alliance respects and promotes human rights, 
civil liberties, and political freedom. We 
believe that these issues are universal and 
must be respected by governments 
worldwide. We will always seek to promote 
our values abroad, promoting a tolerant world 
that respects human rights and supports 
political freedom. 
Alliance will: 
•
Support the international rules-based 
order, and the international structures for 
protecting and advocating for higher 
human rights standards. 
•
Continue to promote our unwavering 
commitment to freedom of and from 
religion across the world and oppose 
discrimination on the basis of religion or 
belief. 
•
Recognise that civil liberties and the rule of 
law are a crucial part of developing stable 
governments and enabling economic 
growth, and ensure this recognition is 
embedded in foreign affairs. 
•
Pay particular attention to protecting the 
rights and well-being of women across the 
world, given that women are typically 
financially and politically disadvantaged in 
comparison to men, and recognising that, 
access to education is a priority. 
•
Use the UK’s role in the Commonwealth to 
make progress on protecting the rights of 
women, religious minorities and LGBTQIA+ 
people. 
•
Strengthen the role the international 
community plays in overseeing elections 
abroad so that we can continue to promote 
fair and free elections. 
•
Continue to support the fight against 
modern slavery, human trafficking and 
criminal, labour and sexual exploitation. 
•
Improve control of arms exports and end 
continued arms sales to countries with 
poor human rights records. 
•
Increase overseas financial support for the 
ongoing refugee crisis, focusing on 
countries that have accepted millions of 
refugees.
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
PAGE 43
Alliance 
Leading Change
Westminster Manifesto 2024
Published and promoted by Sharon Lowry on behalf of 
The Alliance Party of 7 Farmley Road, Newtownabbey, BT36 7TY. 
 
Printed by GPS Colour Graphics Ltd, 4 Marshalls Road, Belfast BT5 6SR.
7 Farmley Road, Newtownabbey, BT36 7TY.
allianceparty.org
alliance@allianceparty.org 
/alliancepartyni 
@allianceparty 
@alliancepartyni 
028 9032 4274
Get 
Involved
