Category: Sinn Fein manifesto
Version: Original
URL: https://vote.sinnfein.ie/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/Sinn-Fein-Westminster-Election-Manifesto-2024.pdf

Strong 
Leadership
Positive Change
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
WESTMINSTER 
ELECTION 2024
SINN FÉIN 
MANIFESTO
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
2
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
Printed by Nova Print, 3c3, Twin Spires Complex, 
155 Northumberland St, Belfast BT13 2AF. 
Promoted by Conor Murphy, 51-53 Falls Road, Belfast BT12 4PD
Privacy Policies & Your Rights: www.sinnfein.ie/privacy
CONTENTS
A Message from Uachtarán Shinn Féin Mary Lou McDonald TD 
3
Introduction – Leas-Uachtarán Shinn Féin First Minister Michelle O’Neill MLA 
4
Strong Leadership 
5
Delivering Positive Change 
6
Standing up for Public Services 
7
Planning for Constitutional Change 
8
Building a Society for All  
9
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
3
Every day, Sinn Féin representatives are 
providing strong leadership and delivering 
positive change for communities across 
Ireland.
Nobody works harder for the communities 
and people we represent.
Sinn Féin is on the side of workers and 
families, working nationally and delivering 
locally.
We are leading the way to build a stronger, 
better and fairer country.
Tá muid ag obair le hÉireann a aontú.
The election on July 4th is a real opportunity 
to step forward towards a better future. 
For a society that defends you when you are 
at your weakest, that encourages you when 
you are at your strongest.
Sinn Féin is committed to delivering on 
the things that matter most to workers and 
families: healthcare, the cost of living, 
housing, education, childcare.
We are focused on what is possible to 
achieve if we work together, making politics 
work, and demonstrating that positive 
change is possible.
On day one after the Westminster election, 
Sinn Féin MPs will be working hard as part 
of a strong all-Ireland Sinn Féin team to 
deliver for all our people and communities.
So I am asking you to send a clear message 
in this election about what you want for the 
future.
To vote for strong leadership and positive 
change.
To vote for a party that is committed to 
working for all.
On July 4th 	
	
	
	
Vótáil Sinn Féin X.
Mary Lou McDonald TD
SINN FÉIN PRESIDENT
A message from 
Uachtarán Shinn Féin 
Mary Lou 
McDonald TD
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
4
INTRODUCTION
Leas-Uachtarán 
Shinn Féin First Minister  
Michelle 
O’Neill MLA
In this election people can send a clear message 
about what they want for the future. 
By voting for Sinn Féin people are endorsing strong 
leadership, positive change, and a commitment to 
work for all.
You have an opportunity to vote for decisions about 
your life and your future to be made here, at home.
You are supporting better funding for our public 
services and rejecting years of Tory cuts which have 
impacted the people of the North.
And you are supporting a stronger economy, creating 
more well-paid jobs, and making childcare more 
accessible and affordable.
No matter what background or community 
people come from, Sinn Féin MPs will work hard 
and deliver on the things that matter to workers, 
families and businesses – the cost of living, health, 
education, good jobs and investing in local and rural 
communities. 
Change will only be delivered in the North by all of 
us working together in the Executive and Assembly, 
but this election gives people a chance to send a clear 
message about the future they want.
Let’s seize the opportunity to return the strongest Sinn 
Féin team and keep moving forward to a new and 
better future.
On July 4th vótáil Sinn Féin X.
Michelle O’Neill MLA
SINN FÉIN VICE PRESIDENT
FIRST MINISTER
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
5
STRONG 
LEADERSHIP
In this election Sinn Féin is asking you to endorse strong leadership and positive change. 
We are committed to delivering effective government, progressive change, and good public services, 
working together with others in the Assembly, the Executive, and the North-South institutions.
Within the Executive Sinn Féin Ministers have set out a positive vision for change. 
We want a stronger and fairer economy that delivers good jobs that pay well, offers workers secure 
conditions, and supports local business. 
We want to increase productivity and opportunities for skills and training, regional balance in 
investment and job opportunities, accessible and affordable childcare - including for those with 
Special Educational Needs - and meet climate change targets through a fair and just transition to net 
zero.
We are committed to strong legal protections for workers and the right to join a trade union.
We are also committed to delivering the flagship projects committed to by the Executive such as the 
Magee University expansion, building the A5 and A6 roads, and the redevelopment of Casement 
Park.
Other projects that promote regional balance and the development of the all-island economy, such as 
Narrow Water Bridge and the Ulster Canal, must also be delivered.
We want to protect our environment including addressing the challenges facing Lough Neagh and 
the surrounding communities. 
We will continue to fight for a fair funding model for the North which meets the needs of public 
services.
Sinn Féin has been central to the fightback against the negative, cuts-driven and destructive policies 
of the Tories, securing unique protections against the worst excesses of Brexit and austerity.
We will continue to offer strong leadership to all our people and communities with a commitment to 
work together with everyone to deliver positive change.
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
6
DELIVERING 
POSITIVE CHANGE
Sinn Féin MPs are part of an all-Ireland team driving forward change on this island.
In the Assembly and Executive, the Dáil, the European Parliament, in council chambers and in 
communities the length and breadth of Ireland, Sinn Féin representatives work together to represent 
the best interests of all the people on this island.
Sinn Féin will stand up for workers, families and communities and be their voice where it counts. 
People want decisions about their lives and their future to be made here, at home, by locally 
accountable elected representatives and Ministers.
Dysfunction within British politics has brought us Brexit, austerity, a cost-of-living crisis, worsening 
poverty rates, the erosion of public services, and an appalling betrayal of victims.
People here want positive change, and Sinn Féin is the only party that offers an all-island approach 
to deliver that change.
Sinn Féin’s influence has been central to the incredible transformation that has taken place in the 
North. 
It was also key to securing protections that shielded Ireland from the worst impacts of Britain’s 
catastrophic Brexit and austerity agenda.
In direct discussions with the British Government, the US, and the European Union we have 
consistently stood up for the rights of citizens.
We are absolutely committed to continue our support and solidarity to the people of Palestine. We 
will seize every opportunity to call for an immediate ceasefire, release of all hostages, humanitarian 
aid, an end to genocide, and a free and independent Palestinian state.
Sinn Féin MPs will continue to prioritise the interests of people and communities. 
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
7
STANDING UP FOR 
PUBLIC SERVICES
Sinn Féin is committed to standing up for workers, families, rural and urban communities, to ensure 
they have access to first-class public services.
We need to see an end to the chronic underfunding of our public services and the undervaluing of 
our public service workers.
Sinn Féin has consistently challenged the British Government’s under-funding of our public services 
- including its failure to give certainty to community organisations and farmers regarding the 
replacement of EU Funding.
We were central to negotiating an enhanced financial package that enabled the restoration of the 
power-sharing institutions.
Sinn Féin Finance Minister Caoimhe Archibald allocated £688 million to prioritise public sector pay 
awards on the restoration of the Executive.
Our Finance Minister has negotiated an improved funding arrangement for future budgets that will 
better equip us to protect the public services that people expect and deserve.
We also want to see multi-annual budgeting so that the Executive is better equipped to plan and 
make longer term investments such as tackling hospital waiting lists, rather than limiting departments 
to managing their budgets on a year-to-year basis.
All Executive departments continue to be impacted by underfunding from the British Treasury.
Sinn Féin continues to demand serious and sustained investment to put Executive finances on a stable 
footing. 
This is vital to allow us to properly take forward the necessary investment in our public service 
workforces.
We will also continue to press for the transfer of fiscal powers to the Executive to allow it to protect 
existing services, and deliver improved public services going forward.
That includes powers for progressive taxation and the power to raise the minimum wage.
We cannot rely on a British Government which will always put its own interests above that of our 
public services and the people who live here.
Decisions should be taken here by locally accountable Executive Ministers and not by ministers in 
London who have repeatedly shown their disdain for our public services and workers.
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
8
PLANNING FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL 
CHANGE
The discussion on constitutional change is everywhere. 
Partition has failed us all. 
The Good Friday Agreement provides a peaceful and democratic pathway through a referendum 
process to achieve a new Ireland within the EU.
Constitutional change requires an Irish government to prepare for the future in a strategic and 
responsible fashion.
This includes establishing a Citizen’s Assembly which creates an opportunity for people to engage in 
a dialogue addressing all the practical and positive possibilities that constitutional change can bring.
We need a process that facilitates generous engagement with those from all our communities on this 
island.
There is now a real opportunity to shape a more prosperous future in a stronger, better and fairer 
country.
An opportunity to create an efficient all-Ireland national health service, a sustainable housing system, 
affordable childcare, and a fair and just transition to a carbon neutral economy.
Resumption of full EU membership as a consequence of unity would hugely benefit the all-island 
economy.
Unity is central to building a modern, inclusive, accountable and fairer society and a country which 
can play its full part in the world.
The Irish and British governments must set a date for a referendum on Irish unity.
Now is the time to plan for the future.
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO
9
BUILDING A 
SOCIETY FOR ALL
Sinn Féin is committed to an inclusive and diverse society based on equal rights and equal 
opportunities for all citizens.
There can be no place for sectarianism, racism, misogyny, homophobia, age or disability 
discrimination in our society.
The scourge of violence against women and girls must be addressed and an Ending Violence Against 
Women and Girls’ (EVAWG) strategy must be delivered.
We want to create a safe, welcoming and inclusive society for all. 
We want a society that values and celebrates the diversity of our identities, religious or none, sexual 
orientation, gender, disability, age, or ethnic origin. 
We want women to be able to access the safe and legal health services they are entitled to.
We want to see parity of esteem for Irish culture and language as provided for in the Good Friday 
Agreement.
Sinn Féin will also uphold the rights of all victims of the conflict to information, maximum disclosure, 
and truth. 
We vigorously oppose the provisions outlined in the British Government’s Legacy Act.
It’s time to address the legacy of the past by implementing the mechanisms agreed at Stormont House 
in a human rights compliant manner.
Sinn Féin will also continue to advocate for victims and survivors of institutional abuse to protect their 
right to truth, justice and redress that they have been denied for too long.
CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR, 
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
