Category: NHS reports Version: Easy Read URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/consultation-paper/2021/08/national-care-service-scotland-consultation-easy-read/documents/rights-breaks-caring/rights-breaks-caring/govscot%3Adocument/rights-breaks-caring.pdf

National Care Service

Rights to breaks from caring

Easy Read

Copyright images © Photosymbols.  Prepared by Disability Equality Scotland 

Rights to breaks from caring – what we want to happen

There has been an Independent Review of Adult Social Care.

The review said any new right to breaks from caring should be part of carers’ rights under the Carers Act.

Carers are people who support friends and family. They would have the right to breaks so they could look after their own wellbeing.

We have looked at how to balance the different ways of having breaks from caring.

A review is when something is looked at closely to see what is working well and what could be better. Wellbeing means feeling comfortable, healthy and happy. 3

Preventative support compared to high level support

A lot of carers need preventative support to help them have a break.

A smaller number of carers will need more intensive support.

Both types of support are important for carer wellbeing.

Preventative support would cost less per person. Intensive support would cost more per person.

It is also important that giving carers short breaks is positive for the people being cared for. Intensive support is when a lot of high level support is needed for breaks.

Preventative support means stopping things becoming a crisis. A crisis is a difficult or dangerous time.


Standard support packages compared to personalised support

A right to breaks from caring could be: • a standard support package – the same package for everyone

• or a right to personalised support to meet need.

A standard support package would mean all qualifying carers got the same thing. It could be: • a number of days or weeks of short break support • or an amount of money.

Personalised means it is designed to meet what each person needs and wants. Standard means everyone gets the same thing.



A set amount of money would not work as well for carers of people with more complicated health and care needs because their replacement care would be more expensive.

Every caring situation is different so a set number of days or weeks might not meet what everyone needs.

A standard package of support may not help a carer to do what matters to them. It would not be enough for carers who do a lot of caring.

With personalised support, every carer would get different support but it would be fairer.



A right for all carers compared to a right for carers who providing higher levels of support

A right to breaks from caring could apply to: • all carers

This would mean every carer could get some support.

The support might not be enough for carers who give high levels of care.

• carers who meet a level in terms of how many hours of care they give and if it is a high level of care.

This would be a way to help many of the carers who need it most.

It would not work well for prevention – to stop carers getting to crisis levels.

It would not be fair to carers who give lower levels of care but who still need help to have a break from caring.



Having clear rules and knowing exactly what will happen compared to provide what each person needs.

If every carer gets the same support package this is clear and easy to understand.

It might seem fairer if everyone gets the same thing but it would not give everyone what they need. People would not get the same benefits from the support. The result would not be fair.

Personalised support would mean people got different support to have the breaks they need. This would be fairer but people would not know what support to expect beforehand.

The new system must help each person to know what they are entitled to. Rules would have to be the same across Scotland. 8

Checking what support is needed

Every option must have some way to: • find out what each carer’s needs are • decide what support they should get • make a plan

This must be done in a way that is person-centred and friendly.

What are the different options? Group A

a)  every carer gets a standard short break

(given in hours or weeks, or as an amount of money)

b) Only carers who do a lot of caring get a standard, short break.

For example people who care for more than 20 hours a week. 

c) The amount of break you get depends on the hours of caring you do.

d) Every carer gets a standard short break if their personal plan says they need one.

All carers have a right to a personal plan to help them see what support they need to achieve what matters to them.

Group B options – Rights to personalised support

e) Every carer gets a personalised short break if their personal plan says they need a break.

f) The same as (e) but also with:

• A statement that every carer must have enough rest and breaks from caring.

• A new duty to check if the carer is getting enough breaks when making their personal plan.

• If a carer is not having enough breaks their plan must say they need support to get breaks from caring.

This would make it a right in law that all carers have a level of time off. It could be used to set a level of how many days or weeks break people need. Group C – a mix

a mix of: • options (a) or (b) for people who do a smaller amount of caring or add more money to the Short Breaks Fund

• options (e) or (f) for people who do a lot of caring.

Copyright images © Photosymbols.  Prepared by Disability Equality Scotland