Category: NHS reports Version: Easy Read URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2024/07/national-care-service-information-sharing-make-care-support-better-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work-easy-read/documents/national-care-service-information-sharing-make-care-support-better/national-care-service-information-sharing-make-care-support-better/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-information-sharing-make-care-support-better.pdf

July 2024 National Care Service: Information sharing to make care support better

What you told us

Easy Read version


Contents Page

About the National Care Service


Introduction


Information sharing to make care and

support better

Discussion sessions


What people told us



What’s next



Get Involved



About the National Care Service

The Scottish Government is working to make support better in Scotland. They are working with people and organisations across the country.

We want everyone to have access to good community health and social care support services. People should get them when they need them. That is why we are setting up the National Care Service (NCS).

Introduction

We worked with organisations who support people who may struggle to engage with the government.

We wanted to work with these people and include their views in our work.



This will help us make sure that the National Care Service helps everyone across Scotland.

This report is about Information sharing and how it could make the National Care Service better.

Information sharing to make care and support better

We looked at how people find information on services.  We looked at how information sharing between staff can make care better.

We looked at how information sharing in health and social care services can give people better experiences.



Discussion sessions

We ran discussion sessions with people from different backgrounds and communities. The people had experience of services.

At the sessions we talked about a lot of different things. Our sessions were held across Scotland.

We also held some sessions online for people who could not travel.

We reached isolated communities and groups. This includes:

• Gypsy and Traveller communities • LGBTQI+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex and other sexual identities) communities • Ethnic minority communities.



What people told us

1. People using care services do not trust information about social care support.

People do not trust information that comes from social work and social care.

People like to get information from someone they know and trust. This could be a member of their community, a voluntary organisation, health staff or family and friends.

People are not sure how good social care information is on a website. Different websites give different information.



Information needs to be clear to help people understand what it means.

Information should be about how social care can make people’s whole lives better.

A service where people can get support from a person not just online is important.

How we will use this

We will find out which information is trusted. We will then make a service that gives the same information to everyone looking for care and support.



2. There is a lack of support for LGBTQI+ communities.

We heard some people are being called the wrong gender or being called their old name when accessing services.

This was because of a lack of understanding. Or information was not correct or available in social care systems.

When a person changes their name on one record it does not update other systems. Changing information with a GP does not update information in a social care system.

People want their chosen name and pronouns to be recorded. People providing care should know them. 8

The language used for gender needs to respect everyone. Training staff about this can help them give better support.

How we will use this

Service should respect people’s identities. Understanding the difficulties LGBTQI+ people face when sharing information will help us do this.

It will also help us to train staff. This will help them understand people’s wishes when it comes information sharing.



3. Some people said their information was not kept private. They do not trust support staff to handle their information.

People told us their information had been shared without them knowing. That stopped them asking for help and the support they need.

Information needs to be shared in a proper and confidential way.

People need to understand their rights about their information being shared.

Staff need to know the laws about information sharing and data protection.


It is important to be able to choose who can access personal information when getting support.

It would help if people could see their information. It would make them feel more in control.

How we will use this

Understanding how people feel about information sharing will help us make a new system. A person’s Care Record would be part of this.

We will think about giving people options on what they would like to share.

It will help people to understand how information is used. It will help staff understand how information should be used.



4. The way social care support is organised means people do not always get the same level of support.

We heard one person gets help from many staff. This makes it hard to build good relationships where people feel safe.

People do not always get the same information about services or support.

Staff should be given training to make sure they are all giving the same levels of care.

Changes to people’s information should be shared between all the different services that are involved in a person’s care



How we will use this

It is useful to understand the problems caused when information is not shared between staff.

This will help us to set up services that people can access in different ways like online, telephone, and in person.



What’s next

Information sharing to make care support better

We learned what information people need to access social care support.

We now know what the Care Record should do. We will change the rules so that information sharing is better.

The National Care Service

The Scottish Government wants to set up a National Care Service. It will give better services that meet people’s needs.

We will keep working with people from groups we know we have not talked to enough.



We will keep working to make social care better. This includes better conditions for our staff. We want it to be a good profession and bring more people into the sector.

Getting involved

We want to hear from as many voices as possible as we develop the new National Care Service (NCS).

If you would like to share your experience or views, you can join our Lived Experience Expert Panel. You will be able to help us come up with ideas for the NCS.

For more information about the National Care Service, visit gov.scot/ncs Crown copyright 2024 Copyright images © Photosymbols This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at www.gov.scot Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at The Scottish Government St Andrew’s House Edinburgh EH1 3DG ISBN: 978-1-83601-423-2 (web only) Published by The Scottish Government, July 2024 Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA PPDAS1454798 (07/24) w w w . g o v . s c o t