Category: NHS reports 
Version: Easy Read
URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2024/07/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work-easy-read/documents/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-told-easy-read-version/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-told-easy-read-version/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-told-easy-read-version.pdf

July 2024
 
 
National Care Service: Making sure your 
voice is heard  
 
 
What you told us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Easy Read version 
 
 
Contents Page 
 
 
About the National Care Service   
 
 
1 
 
Introduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
Making sure your voice is heard  
 
 
2 
 
Discussion sessions  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
What people told us about accessing   
 
4 
support planning 
 
What people told us about independent   
8 
advocacy 
 
What people told us about complaints 
 
16 
 
What’s next  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
Get Involved 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
1 
 
About the National Care Service  
 
 
 
The Scottish Government is working to make 
support better in Scotland. They are working with 
people and organisations across the country. 
 
 
 
We want everyone to have access to good 
community health and social care support 
services. People should get them when they need 
them. That is why we are setting up the National 
Care Service (NCS). 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
We worked with organisations who support 
people who may struggle to engage with the 
government. 
 
 
 
We wanted to work with these people and include 
their views in our work. 
 
 
2 
 
This will help us make sure that the National Care 
Service helps everyone across Scotland. 
 
  
 
This report is about making sure your voice is 
heard and how it could make the National Care 
Service better. 
 
 
 
Making sure your voice is heard 
 
We want to make sure your voice is heard. This 
will help people to claim their rights, make 
choices about their lives and be involved in 
decisions about their care. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Discussion sessions 
 
 
We ran discussion sessions with people from 
different backgrounds and communities. The 
people had experience of accessing services. 
 
 
 
At the sessions we talked about a lot of different 
things. Our sessions were held in different places 
across Scotland. 
 
 
 
We also held some sessions online for people 
who could not travel. 
 
 
 
 
We reached isolated communities and groups 
including:  
 
• Gypsy and Traveller communities 
• LGBTQI+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
queer, intersex and other sexual identities) 
communities 
• People with experience of homelessness 
• Ethnic minority communities. 
4 
 
What people told us about accessing support 
planning 
 
 
1. Some people we spoke to do not always 
trust social care services. 
 
 
 
This was especially true for people who had 
experience of homelessness.  
 
 
 
Lots of people said they trust GPs to help them 
access medical and social care support. But it 
could take a long time to get a GP appointment. 
 
 
 
Some groups of people, especially homeless 
people, find it difficult to register at GP practices. 
This can stop people getting the support they 
need. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Community link workers are important as they are 
trusted by people. 
 
 
 
Some people feel forced into residential care. 
This can cause longer term harm, like worse 
mental health. 
 
 
 
Some people with experience of homelessness 
worried about speaking with professionals. They 
felt they could lose their housing or benefits.  
 
 
How we will use this 
 
 
We will think about how to deliver support 
services that people trust. 
 
 
 
We will also think about how trust affects other 
areas like independent advocacy and complaints 
 
6 
 
 
2. Diverse groups do not think their needs are 
understood. This makes it hard for them to 
access social care support. 
 
 
 
People said that social care support can be hard 
to access for the Gypsy and Traveller community 
or homeless people. Part of this is because of 
lack of understanding. 
 
 
 
People also said there is a lack of understanding 
about transgender people. Respecting people’s 
gender choices is important for their care and 
support. 
 
 
 
People’s preferences should be included in 
assessments, care planning and complaints 
processes. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
A lack of support in housing services can lead to 
bad health. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Services need to be flexible to help different 
people. 
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
 
We will look at how people’s identities can be part 
of their support plans in the National Care 
Service.  
 
 
 
This will include training for staff. We will also 
think about how this impacts our plans for 
independent advocacy and complaints. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
What people told us about independent advocacy 
 
 
 
1. Independent advocacy services should 
understand challenges faced by different 
groups. They should give them special 
support.  
 
 
 
Independent advocacy can help people to: 
• understand their rights 
• have their voices heard 
• have a say in decisions about their care 
 
 
 
Independent advocates are separate from the 
organisations that give you social care or 
community health support. This means that their 
only job is to work with you and help you. 
 
 
 
We heard that different groups have different 
problems when using social care services. They 
might need help to use advocacy services. 
 
9 
 
 
 
People said it was important to have an 
independent advocate who shared and 
understood their experiences. 
 
 
 
Some people felt there is a need for special 
training about domestic abuse in services. This 
would mean better support could be offered. 
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
 
We will think about how to help people access 
independent advocacy across Scotland.  
 
 
 
We will think about how to give people better 
information so they can understand the different 
types of independent advocacy. 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
2. A professional advocate could be a helpful 
support for people, including support when 
making a complaint. 
 
 
 
Some people said they might want an 
independent advocate to support them with 
complaints. People would want the independent 
advocates to know about equalities law and 
people’s rights. 
 
 
 
Independent advocates should know about the 
community they are supporting. People said an 
independent advocate should know about the 
complaints system.  
 
 
 
People said that good advocacy would give 
people more confidence when accessing support. 
It would make sure their voices are heard and 
needs are met. 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
Some people said making a complaint on your 
own without support can be very stressful. 
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We will think about how to give people better 
information on how independent advocacy can 
support them.  
 
 
 
We will think about information and guidance for 
independent advocates. This will help them 
support people when making a complaint. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
3. People might want support from advocacy 
services to help them with a wide range of 
issues. 
 
 
 
People said independent advocates should 
understand people’s rights and the challenges 
they might face. People should be told what an 
independent advocate can and cannot do. 
 
 
 
 
People said it can bring up difficult feelings when 
they use advocacy services. 
 
 
 
Some people might want an independent 
advocate to work with both them and services to 
sort out issues. However this is not something 
they can do. 
 
 
 
 
Some people feel alone when getting care and 
support. They said it can be difficult. They would 
like someone to support them through that. 
13 
 
 
 
Some people said it was difficult to access and 
manage different services to receive support. 
 
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We will look at how to make sure accessible 
information on independent advocacy is made 
available. This will help them know what an 
independent advocate can and cannot do.  
 
 
 
We will also work with people to understand 
where there is not enough independent advocacy 
support. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
4. There is not enough support and advocacy 
for unpaid carers. 
 
 
 
Unpaid carers said they do not get enough 
support. This makes them exhausted and makes 
it harder to care for loved ones properly. 
 
 
 
People who get care can feel like a problem for 
their carer. They feel they need to find extra 
support for themselves. 
 
 
 
Some people in the Gypsy and Traveller 
community did not know about the support 
available for unpaid carers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Many people said their families are expected to 
support each other in their communities. They do 
not get support from outside their community. 
 
 
 
Some people did not know they are an unpaid 
carer. They did not know they were able to get 
support. 
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We will think about independent advocacy for 
unpaid carers. We will also look at why there is 
not enough independent advocacy support for 
unpaid carers.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
What people told us about complaints 
 
 
1. The complaints system is too complicated. 
It stops people from making a complaint. 
 
 
 
Some people said is not worth their time to make 
a complaint. This is because they feel it will be 
too complicated or it will not make things better. 
  
 
 
Some groups said they did not want to cause 
trouble. People from Gypsy or Traveller 
communities worry that they will be treated 
unfairly if they make a complaint. 
 
 
 
People with dementia said they needed support 
from someone like a close family member to 
make a complaint.  
 
 
 
 
17 
 
People said they were not given correct timelines 
for dealing with their complaint. They were not 
kept up to date when these changed. 
 
 
 
People need accessible information on making a 
complaint. People should be told what is 
happening at each step.  
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We will think about how different people can find 
it hard to make a complaint. We will make sure 
the complaints system is accessible for people 
accessing social care and their carers. 
 
 
 
We will also think about how to make sure people 
get clear, accessible information about making a 
complaint. 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
What’s next 
 
 
What’s next for access and support planning 
 
 
We will use what people have told us to make 
sure support planning is the same across the 
National Care Service. It will respect people’s 
identities.  
 
 
 
 
 
What’s next for independent advocacy 
 
 
We will use what people have told us to help 
improve independent advocacy for people who 
use the National Care Service. This will help 
people take part in decisions about their care.  
  
 
 
We will continue to work with people to 
understand problems and come up with ideas to 
improve independent advocacy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
What’s next for complaints 
 
 
We will use what people have told us to improve 
the complaints processes for the National Care 
Service.  
 
 
 
We will look at whether guidance and training for 
staff could help people feel more understood and 
respected when they make a complaint.  
 
 
 
 
What’s next for the National Care Service 
 
 
The Scottish Government wants to set up a 
National Care Service.  
 
 
 
We will keep working with people from groups we 
know we have not talked to enough. 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
We will keep working to make the social care 
sector better. This includes better conditions for 
our staff. We want it to be a good profession and 
bring more people into the sector. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
Getting involved 
 
 
 
We want to hear from as many voices as possible 
as we develop the new National Care Service 
(NCS).  
 
 
 
If you would like to share your experience or 
views, you can join our Lived Experience Expert 
Panel. You will be able to help us come up with 
ideas for the NCS. 
 
 
 
For more information about the National Care 
Service, visit gov.scot/ncs 
© Crown copyright 2024
Copyright images © Photosymbols
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to 
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.scot 
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at 
The Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House
Edinburgh
EH1 3DG
ISBN: 978-1-83601-421-8 (web only)
Published by The Scottish Government, July 2024
Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA
PPDAS1454839 (07/24)
w
w
w
.
g
o
v
.
s
c
o
t
