Category: NHS reports 
Version: Easy Read
URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2024/08/national-care-service-governance-representation-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work-easy-read/documents/national-care-service-board-membership-told-easy-read-version/national-care-service-board-membership-told-easy-read-version/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-board-membership-told-easy-read-version.pdf

National Care Service:  
Board and membership 
What you told us 
Easy Read version 
August 2024
1 
Contents 
About the National Care Service 
2 
Introduction 
2 
About National Care Service Board and membership 
3 
Discussion sessions 
4 
What people told us about Board organisation and 
membership  
5 
What’s next 
12 
Getting involved 
13 
2 
 
About the National Care Service  
 
 
 
The Scottish Government is working to make 
support better in Scotland. They are working with 
people and organisations across the country. 
 
 
 
We want everyone to have access to good local 
services. People should get them when they need 
them. That is why we are setting up the National 
Care Service (NCS). 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
We worked with organisations who support 
people who struggle to speak with the 
government. 
 
 
 
We wanted to work with these people and include 
their views in our work. 
 
 
 
3 
 
This will help us make sure that the National Care 
Service helps everyone across Scotland. 
 
  
 
This report is about setting up the board, its 
membership and how it could make the National 
Care Service better. 
 
 
 
 
About National Care Service Board and membership 
 
 
 
Scottish Ministers will work with local councils 
and the NHS to make sure the National Care 
Service is working well. 
 
 
 
They will work together as part of a new National 
Care Service Board (NCS Board). We want to 
make sure that the NCS Board includes people 
with lived experience.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Discussion sessions 
 
 
We ran discussion sessions with people from 
different backgrounds and communities. The 
people had experience of accessing services. 
 
 
 
We worked with different organisations that work 
in health and disabilities. 
 
 
 
We talked about: 
• who should be on the board 
• how someone with lived experience could be 
supported to be on the board 
• how people can be included in discussions 
and making decisions. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
What people told us about Board organisation and 
membership 
 
 
1. People want more information about how 
the board will work. They also want to know 
what board members will have to do. 
 
 
 
People said they wanted information on who is on 
the NCS Board. They also want to know what is 
expected from members so they can decide if 
they want to join. 
 
 
 
People said members with lived experience 
should be part of making decisions. 
 
 
 
People told us that board members need to have 
knowledge and understanding of health and 
social care. This is so they can take part properly. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
How we will use this 
 
 
We will make sure board members have lived 
experience of health and social care services. 
 
 
 
2. The way people apply for and join the NCS 
Board is important.  
 
 
 
People said board members should get training 
on inclusion. Members with lived experience 
should have access to training on topics they are 
unsure about. 
 
 
 
People said all members of the NCS Board 
should get the same training. This training should 
go on for as long as it is needed. This will mean 
there is more inclusion and equality between all 
members of the board. 
 
 
 
7 
 
People told us there should be training on things 
like equality, decision making, communications, 
and digital skills.  
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We will make training support available to 
members of the board. This will help us when 
finding new board members. 
 
 
 
 
3. Board meetings should be inclusive and 
members should be given support to take 
part.   
 
 
 
People told us that all members should be able to 
take part in a way that is best for them. Many said 
that face-to-face meetings help build 
relationships. 
 
 
 
8 
 
Some members could join in online if it suits them 
better. Meetings in person could happen once or 
twice a year. Some people said meetings should 
be held across Scotland. 
  
 
 
People said it would help to have information 
ahead of meetings and a list of who would attend. 
A contact to answer questions would help. 
 
 
 
People said that holding informal sessions before 
and after meetings would be good. 
 
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We will think about these suggestions. We will 
also talk about them more in future co-design 
sessions. 
 
 
 
9 
 
4. It is important to have the right people and 
the right number of people on the board 
 
 
 
People think that the size of the board needs to 
enable everyone to take part. People with lived 
experience should have a say in who can join the 
NCS Board.  
 
 
 
People suggested the board should have 
between 10 and 12 members. Too many people 
make it hard for some to be heard. 
 
 
 
Some people said that a small membership would 
mean voting on issues would not be fair. 
 
 
 
People said the board chair should have the right 
experience. Members could take turns running 
meetings. 
 
 
10 
 
People said that having lived experience board 
members would mean different views were heard. 
The board members would feel more comfortable 
sharing information. 
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We will think more about these suggestions and 
how they could work. We will make sure that all 
members of the board are able to take part. 
 
 
 
 
5. Board members will need the right support 
to be able to take part properly.   
 
 
 
People with lived experience want support to do 
their job properly. People expect to be paid for 
their time and expenses as board members. This 
includes travel costs. 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Support might be different for each member. 
Some people might need computers and training. 
 
 
 
Some people were worried about how being a 
board member might affect their benefits.  
 
 
 
How we will use this 
 
We need to support all members. We will make 
sure the right support is available.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
What’s next 
 
What’s next for Board organisation and membership 
 
 
We want people who have lived experience to 
help us set up the NCS Board. This will mean all 
members can take part fully. 
 
 
  
What’s next for the National Care Service 
 
 
The Scottish Government wants to set up a 
National Care Service. It will give better services 
that meet people’s needs. 
 
 
 
We will keep working with people from groups we 
know we have not talked to enough. 
 
 
 
We will keep working to make the social care 
sector better. This includes better conditions for 
our staff. We want it to be a good profession and 
bring more people into the sector. 
 
13 
 
Getting involved 
 
 
We want to hear from as many voices as possible 
as we develop the new National Care Service 
(NCS).  
 
 
 
If you would like to share your experience or 
views, you can join our Lived Experience Expert 
Panel. You will be able to help us come up with 
ideas for the NCS. 
 
 
 
For more information about the National Care 
Service, visit gov.scot/ncs 
© Crown copyright 2024
Copyright images © Photosymbols
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to 
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.scot 
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at 
The Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House
Edinburgh
EH1 3DG
ISBN: 978-1-83601-533-8 (web only)
Published by The Scottish Government, August 2024
Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA
PPDAS1481238 (08/24)
w
w
w
.
g
o
v
.
s
c
o
t
