Category: NHS reports 
Version: Easy Read
URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/advice-and-guidance/2024/05/national-care-service-forum-2023-follow-up-questions-answers-easy-read/documents/national-care-service-forum-2023-follow-up-questions-answers/national-care-service-forum-2023-follow-up-questions-answers/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-forum-2023-follow-up-questions-answers.pdf

 
National Care Service Forum 
2023 – follow-up questions and 
answers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
2 
 
Contents page 
How will the National Care Service (NCS) fix the pressure on the 
NHS? 
Page 3 
How can we help people access support? 
Page 3 
How will the NCS include people who cannot do things online? 
Page 5 
Could more funding and local changes work better than a big 
change like the NCS? 
Page 6 
What does the Verity House Agreement mean? 
Page 7 
How will private care companies fit into the NCS? How will the 
government make sure they do a good job? 
Page 10 
What is the Charter and what will it do? 
Page 11 
How will the NCS support unpaid carers? 
Page 13 
Could we replace eligibility criteria? 
Page 14 
Could some charities help with assessments? 
Page 15 
Will the NCS learn from Self-directed Support (SDS)? 
Page 15 
How can the NCS improve mental health services? 
Page 16 
 
3 
 
 
How will the National Care Service (NCS) fix the 
pressure on the NHS? 
 
The National Care Service (NCS) will help 
community health, social work and social care 
support work together. 
Community health is the health service people 
use most. Improving it will mean there is less 
pressure on the National Health Service (NHS). 
How can we help people access support? 
 
Your local council has information for carers in 
your area. This is usually at a local carer centre. 
You can find your local carer centre at Care 
Information Scotland.  
Or you can ask your GP, district nurse, health 
visitor, or social worker. 
 
Social care support from home includes self-
directed support. This will still be important in the 
NCS. 
4 
 
 
 
There is free advocacy support and advice 
through the Support in the Right Direction 
programme.  
 
The Scottish Government funds the Care 
Information Scotland website. It has the latest 
information on social care support. 
 
How will the NCS include people who cannot do things 
online? 
 
You will be able to access NCS services and 
information in different ways, not just online. For 
example: 
• over the phone 
• face-to-face 
• reading a print-out 
• reading a translation 
5 
 
 
 
We are designing online services with people 
who access or deliver services. 
The NCS will also work with other Scottish 
Government inclusion programmes, like: 
• Connecting Scotland 
• Digital Health and Care Digital Inclusion 
programme 
• Citizen panels and Lived Experience 
Experts Panel (LEEP) 
 
Could more funding and local changes work better than 
a big change like the NCS? 
 
In 2021 there was a report called the Independent 
Review of Adult Social Care. It recommended 
changing social care in Scotland. It said there 
should be a National Care Service (NCS). 
6 
 
 
 
It said that Scottish Ministers should be 
responsible for adult social care support. 
The public elects Scottish Ministers to the 
Scottish Parliament. 
 
The NCS will make sure improvements can be 
made across the country. 
It will also help services respond to local 
communities. 
 
We have promised to raise social care spending 
by a quarter before the next Scottish election. 
We will spend this money on things like: 
• the workforce 
• changes the Independent Review 
recommended 
• dealing with higher need for services 
• moving towards the NCS 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
What does the Verity House Agreement mean? 
 
The Verity House Agreement sets out how the 
national Scottish Government and local councils 
can improve services together. 
 
We will follow this approach by setting up a new 
national framework for the NCS. 
A framework is a way of organising things. 
 
The framework will mean under the NCS local 
councils and health boards will still deliver 
services. They will also keep staff and assets. 
Assets means things they own, like buildings 
 
We can make the changes we want by 
improving the local organisations that help 
manage services now. These organisations are 
called Integration Authorities. 
8 
 
 
 
There must be a strong link between local and 
national decisions.  
At national level, there will be a new NCS 
Board. A board is a group of people who make 
decisions about an organisation. For example, 
decisions about the NCS. 
 
The NCS Board will oversee how local plans 
perform.  
We want the NCS Board to have Ministerial 
powers of intervention. This means it will be 
able to make changes if it needs to. 
 
We will involve people who have used or 
delivered services that will be under the NCS. 
They will help make decisions.  
We will give more people on the NCS Board 
voting rights for making decisions. 
9 
 
 
 
We will design the NCS Board details with:  
• people with experience of accessing 
community health, social work and social 
care support services 
• unpaid carers 
• care providers 
• workforce 
• stakeholder organisations 
How will private care companies fit into the NCS? How 
will the government make sure they do a good job? 
 
Public, private and charity organisations will still 
deliver services under the NCS. 
These services include community health, social 
work and social care support. 
10 
 
 
 
Service providers from outside the public sector 
will answer to local councils and health boards. 
They will do this through the way their contracts 
are managed. 
 
They will have different kinds of oversight from: 
• the Care Inspectorate 
• the Scottish Social Services Council 
(SSSC) 
• Healthcare Improvement Scotland 
 
We are also thinking about how the NCS can 
use ethical commissioning and procurement. 
Ethical means good and fair. 
 
Commissioning and procurement means 
finding and buying things like equipment and 
services. 
11 
 
 
 
We will work with people who work in 
commissioning and procurement.  
We will also work with people who represent the 
workforce and service providers. They will help 
us develop tools and guidance. 
What is the Charter and what will it do? 
 
The Charter of Rights and Responsibilities will 
help people understand their rights and what to 
expect from the NCS. It will help them find 
support, advice and information. 
 
It will help people when they are getting: 
• social care support 
 
• social work services 
 
• community health services 
12 
 
 
 
The Charter will also tell people what to do if 
something goes wrong. This might mean:  
• making a complaint 
 
• getting independent advocacy 
 
 
We want the Charter to be able to change if it 
needs to. For example, if there are changes in 
the law or the rules for the NCS. 
How will the NCS support unpaid carers? 
 
The NCS is about improving people’s lives. 
This includes unpaid carers. 
We will give carers a new right to personalised 
short breaks support if they need it. 
13 
 
 
 
This will help protect carers’ wellbeing and help 
to support caring relationships. 
 
We are working on this with a group involving 
people with an interest. This includes:  
• unpaid carers 
• people who provide services 
• carer centres 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
Could we replace eligibility criteria? 
 
The Scottish Government and the Convention of 
Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA) are working 
together on updating eligibility criteria and 
assessments.  
COSLA represents all of Scotland’s councils. 
Eligibility criteria are the needs people must 
have to access different kinds of support.   
 
Ministers and COSLA leaders will think about 
different ways of working. They will decide which 
are best. 
 
We want to make sure NCS services are based 
on human rights and needs.  
 
 
 
15 
 
 
Could some charities help with assessments? 
 
We are thinking about how to improve the first 
services people use when they need help. 
This includes assessment and support planning. 
These help people access the right support.  
 
 
Will the NCS learn from Self-directed Support (SDS)? 
 
The plans for the NCS involve human rights, 
independent living and supporting people to 
thrive. Self-Directed Support (SDS) helps deliver 
these aims. 
 
We are working with local councils, charities and 
COSLA to improve SDS.  
16 
 
 
 
We published our SDS Improvement Plan last 
year. It aims to embed these SDS principles in 
social care support in Scotland, including the 
NCS:  
• participation 
• dignity 
• involvement 
• informed choice 
• collaboration 
 
How can the NCS improve mental health services?  
 
The NCS is likely to involve health and social 
care working more closely together. 
Mental health is in both these areas. 
17 
 
 
 
This is a chance to think about how we run local 
mental health services. 
We will also think about how we design and 
provide mental health services. This will help us 
meet changing needs.   
 
© Crown copyright 2024
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to 
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.scot
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at
The Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House
Edinburgh
EH1 3DG
ISBN: 978-1-83601-281-8 (web only)
Published by The Scottish Government, May 2024
Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA
PPDAS 1426294 (05/24)
w
w
w
.
g
o
v
.
s
c
o
t
