Category: National Care Services Version: Easy Read URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/factsheet/2024/06/national-care-service-factsheet-easy-read-version/documents/national-care-service-factsheet-easy-read-version/national-care-service-factsheet-easy-read-version/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-factsheet-easy-read-version.pdf

National Care Service factsheet Easy Read version June 2024 2

Contents

About the National Care Service     3 NCS principles    . 3 NCS services      5 When people will use the NCS   . 7 Why we need an NCS          7 Challenges we face right now     8 What will change under the NCS   . 8 How we will organise the NCS     10 NCS Board       10 Reformed integration authorities          11 How much the NCS will cost      12 How the NCS will affect workers    13 How we are co-designing the NCS          14 What’s next for the NCS        16



Information correct at the time of publishing. About the National Care Service

The Scottish Government is working to improve community health, social work and social care support. We are working with people across Scotland who have used or worked in these services.

We want everyone to have access to good health care and social care support. They should have this wherever they live in Scotland. This is why we are designing a National Care Service. This is called the NCS for short.

NCS principles

The NCS will have principles to help us to: • make sure to include people’s rights in care support • help people live a good life 4

• provide care that can be given without running out of money and helps people and their carers feel safe

• help people before their care needs rise and take action as soon as they need it

• co-design services with people who use or work in them and their carers. Co-design means you can share your ideas and experiences with us. It means working with other people to find out how to make things better.

• improve services to make sure people are treated fairly 5

• make sure the NCS talks to people in a way that they can understand

• help the workforce to feel valued • make sure the NCS follows fair work practices

NCS services

The NCS will aim to make working together and sharing information easier for services. The NCS will also aim to: • improve public and staff access to information

• make sure things like management, service standards, and help to make services better are the same across Scotland 6

• help people understand and claim their rights

• help people access complaints processes if they need them

• make independent advocacy easier to access for people who use the NCS. Independent advocacy helps people to: o understand their rights o make their voices heard o have a say in decisions affecting them



When people will use the NCS

There are lots of reasons you could need help from the NCS in the future. These include all the same reasons you might need community health, social work or social care support now. Some examples are: • an accident, disability or health condition • moving from children’s to adult services • engaging with the prison system or children and young people’s services

Why we need an NCS

People who have used or worked in services that will be part of the NCS told us we need to make changes. We want the NCS to help us focus on health so people have better and longer lives. Our health, social work, and social care systems must work together for this.



Challenges we face right now

We have data showing the complex relationship between health and social care right now. We have data showing how many people: • get health and social work support • get care at home • live in care homes • are unpaid carers • are young carers

What will change under the NCS

The NCS will aim to help all people across Scotland get the same level of services. This will be the case whatever NCS service they need and wherever they live.

The NCS will make sure different services work under the same guidance and share the information they need.



The NCS will involve people with experience of services at every level of planning.

We will create a new National Social Work Agency (NSWA) as part of the NCS. NSWA will be a single national body. It will work with agencies and social workers.

NSWA will lead these things across Scotland: • social work education • helping local areas improve • workforce planning • social work training and development



How we will organise the NCS NCS Board

There will be a new NCS Board. A board is a group of people who make decisions about an organisation. For example, decisions about the NCS.

The Board will make sure: • NCS services are consistent. Consistent means they are as good everywhere and for everyone across Scotland

• NCS services are fair and based on rights

• communities can get all the benefits of the changes 11

The NCS Board will include people: • from the Scottish Government • from local councils • from the NHS • who have experience of using or delivering services or unpaid care We will co-design how board membership will work. We will also co-design details like the support people might need to take part.

Reformed integration authorities

We will reform local integration authorities. Reform means change or improvement. Integration authorities are the organisations that plan local community health, social work and social care support services. Under the NCS, we will call integration authorities NCS local boards. 12

Under the NCS, NCS local boards will still be responsible for planning local services. But people with experience of using or delivering services will sit on NCS local boards. They will have voting rights to help make decisions. They will get support and training to do this.

The new NCS Board will give national oversight and support to the NCS local boards. This will help keep standards the same all over Scotland. How much the NCS will cost

From 2022 to 2023 we spent almost 6 billion pounds on social care in Scotland. The source for this figure is on gov.scot. There will be some extra costs in future years to make the NCS happen. We expect these costs to be about 3 hundred and 45 million pounds between the years 2022 and 2032. The NCS could have large benefits for people who access or deliver community health, social work or social care support. This includes unpaid carers.



How the NCS will affect workers

Hundreds of thousands of people in Scotland work in community health, social care and social work.

The NCS will improve conditions by: • making sure we plan and deliver the work all those people do in the same way everywhere in Scotland

• drawing on the experience of workers in its design

• including people who represent workers on the NCS Board



• working on developing a Workforce Charter. This will be a document that will support workers to feel involved, supported and valued. .

How we are co-designing the NCS

We are using co-design to develop how some parts of the NCS will work.

Things we are co-designing include: • a Charter document explaining people’s rights and helping them claim them 15

• a way to help people access complaints processes

• how people’s health and social care record will work.

We have heard from people who use services and their friends and family. We have also heard from workers, carers, and organisations who give care.

In the last year we have already heard from more than 1 thousand people from across Scotland. We are carrying on this work.

Record 

What’s next for the NCS

On Thursday 29 February 2024 the Scottish Parliament agreed for the NCS Bill to pass Stage 1. This means they agreed the NCS Bill should go ahead to the next stage, which is Stage 2. A Bill is a proposed law that needs to be passed by the Parliament before it can become a law.

We are now in Stage 2 of the Bill. This is when we can make changes to the Bill, to make the NCS work better.

We will continue co-designing the NCS. We also set up an Expert Legislative Advisory Group to work with us on the NCS Bill and improving services. This group was made up of people with an interest in the Bill. It included people with lived experience.



We will keep improving social care, social work and community health for staff. We will make them better places to work.

We are committed to delivering the NCS.

© Crown copyright 2024 Copyright images © Photosymbols This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at www.gov.scot Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at The Scottish Government St Andrew’s House Edinburgh EH1 3DG ISBN: 978-1-83601-412-6 (web only) Published by The Scottish Government, June 2024 Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA PPDAS1426274 (06/24) w w w . g o v . s c o t