Category: National Care Services
Version: Easy Read
URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2022/08/national-care-service-evidence-paper-scotlands-health-demographic-profile-easy-read/documents/national-care-service-evidence-paper-scotlands-health-demographic-profile-easy-read/national-care-service-evidence-paper-scotlands-health-demographic-profile-easy-read/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-evidence-paper-scotlands-health-demographic-profile-easy-read.pdf

National Care Service
Evidence paper
Scotland’s health and demographic profile
Easy Read
August 2022
National Care Service 
Evidence paper 
 
Scotland’s health and demographic profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright images © Photosymbols.  Prepared by Disability Equality Scotland 
 
2 
 
Scotland’s health and demographic profile 
 
 
Demographic means information about 
the people who live in Scotland. 
This includes information about: 
• how long people live 
• how many people have long-term 
health conditions 
• how the population could change in 
the future  
 
 
Life expectancy means the average 
length of time that a person is expected 
to live. 
Scotland’s population has the lowest 
life expectancy in Western Europe. 
 
 
Socioeconomic inequalities means 
people are not treated fairly because of 
their education, income and job. 
All people do not have the same 
choices and chances. 
Scotland has the widest socioeconomic 
inequalities in health in Western 
Europe.  
This means there is a big difference in 
health between the poorest and richest 
people.    
3 
 
 
In 2018, 2019 and 2020: 
• on average, a boy born in Scotland 
would live to 76 
• on average, a girl born in Scotland 
would live to 81  
 
 
People who live in deprived areas 
have shorter lives. 
A deprived area is one where people 
have more difficulties in different parts 
of their life.  
For example many of the people who 
live there do not have: 
• enough money 
• choices and chances 
• resources – there might not be as 
many public services 
 
 
 
Men born in a deprived area lived for 13 
years less than men born in an area 
that is not deprived. 
Women born in a deprived area lived 
for 10 years less than women born in 
an area that is not deprived. 
 
 
4 
In 2018, 2019 and 2020: 
• on average, a boy born in Scotland
would have good health until they
were 60
• on average, a girl born in Scotland
would have good health until they
were 61
People born in a deprived area had 
good health for 24 less years than 
people born in an area that is not 
deprived. 
It is difficult to know how many people 
will need social care in the future. 
In the future there will be a lot more 
people over 65 living in Scotland. 
More people are living on their own. 
Most people aged over 65 who got 
social care had 2 or more medical 
conditions. 
© Crown copyright 2022
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to 
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.scot 
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at 
The Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House
Edinburgh
EH1 3DG
ISBN: 978-1-80435-854-2 (web only)
Published by The Scottish Government, August 2022
Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA
PPDAS1142182 (08/22)
w
w
w
.
g
o
v
.
s
c
o
t
