Category: National Care Services
Version: Easy Read
URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2022/08/national-care-service-evidence-paper-people-adult-social-care-unpaid-carers-easy-read/documents/national-care-service-evidence-paper-people-adult-social-care-unpaid-carers-easy-read/national-care-service-evidence-paper-people-adult-social-care-unpaid-carers-easy-read/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-evidence-paper-people-adult-social-care-unpaid-carers-easy-read.pdf

National Care Service
Evidence paper
People who get adult social care and  
unpaid carers
Easy Read
August 2022
National Care Service 
Evidence paper 
People who get adult social care and 
unpaid carers 
Copyright images © Photosymbols and Canva.  Prepared by Disability Equality Scotland 
2 
 
People who get social care and unpaid carers in 
Scotland 
 
 
 
Around 1 in every 25 people in 
Scotland got social care support and 
services at some point in 2020/2021.  
 
 
More than 3 out of every 4 people 
getting social care support in 2020 to 
2021 were aged 65 and over.  
More than 3 out of every 5 people 
getting social care support in 2020/ 
2021 were female. 
 
 
More than 93 thousand people got 
home care at some point in 2020/2021.  
More than 130 thousand people had a 
community alarm or telecare service.  
A community alarm is worn around your 
wrist or neck. 
You use it to call for help if there is an 
emergency – for example if you have 
fallen and cannot get up. 
Telecare means alarms and devices 
that help people to stay safe in their 
own homes.  
3 
 
 
In 2021 more than 33 thousand people 
were living in care homes. 
Most of these people were living in care 
homes for older people. 
The number of people living in care 
homes has gone down over the last 10 
years. 
 
 
Before the coronavirus pandemic we 
thought there were between 7 and 8 
hundred thousand unpaid carers living 
in Scotland 
In 2020 we thought there were more 
than 8 hundred thousand adult unpaid 
carers living in Scotland.  
 
An unpaid carer is anyone who cares 
for a friend or family member who 
cannot cope without their support. 
 
 
 
Older, working age females are more 
likely to provide unpaid care than other 
groups.  
People in the most deprived areas are 
more likely to give 50 or more hours of 
unpaid care a week.  
4 
A deprived area is one where people 
have more difficulties in different parts 
of their life.  
For example many of the people who 
live there do not have: 
• enough money
• choices and chances
• resources – there might not be as
many public services
The Covid-19 pandemic made a big 
difference to social care services.  
Some people got less care at home or 
got their care packages stopped. 
Services had to focus on giving support 
to people with very urgent needs.  
Many people and families who get care 
decided to get less support. 
Between the start of the pandemic and 
February 2022, more than 1 in 4 deaths 
where Covid-19 was mentioned on the 
death certificate were in care homes. 
© Crown copyright 2022
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to 
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.scot 
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at 
The Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House
Edinburgh
EH1 3DG
ISBN: 978-1-80435-855-9 (web only)
Published by The Scottish Government, August 2022
Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA
PPDAS1142202 (08/22)
w
w
w
.
g
o
v
.
s
c
o
t
