Category: NHS reports Version: Easy Read URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/consultation-paper/2021/08/national-care-service-scotland-consultation-easy-read/documents/national-care-service-scotland-consultation-easy-read/national-care-service-scotland-consultation-easy-read/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-scotland-consultation-easy-read.pdf

A National Care Service for Scotland Consultation Easy Read August 2021 1

NATIONAL CARE SERVICE CONSULTATION

What is a Consultation?

As they usually do before making important changes, the Scottish Government wants to seek views of people on these proposed changes.

When the Scottish Government asks people for their views it is called a Consultation.

The Scottish Government would like your views on the National Care Service.

The responses should be provided by 2nd November 2021.



What this consultation is about

This consultation is about how we deliver social care in Scotland.

Social care is important. This has been made even clearer in the pandemic. Social care is support for disabled people, those with mental health conditions, older people, people with or recovering from addictions, homeless people, children and families who need support, or children who are unable to live with their own families. It also includes support for unpaid carers.

We want high quality services for everyone that needs them.

We want the system to support people to do the best they can.

We asked the Independent Review of Adult Social Care to look at how we could make adult social care better. The Independent Review recommended a National Care Service. The Scottish Government would be responsible for adult social care and support.

The Scottish Government want to do more. We are asking for views on making a community health and social care service that supports people of all ages.

We want the National Care Service to make the rules and standards for community health and social care in Scotland.



Chapter One: Improving Care for People

We need to make health and social care support better.

Services are important in supporting the health and wellbeing of people. We want people to do the best they can.

We must work together to have a person-centred way of working. This chapter covers plans to make the system stronger.

Improvement

There are national organisations that advise to make services better. However, this does not always mean all services in Scotland get better.

The Independent Review of Adult Social Care said there should be a National Improvement Programme.  This will make things better such as experiences of self-directed support, care in care homes and workplaces for staff.

Standards should be high everywhere in Scotland. Learning can be shared. This will help make services better in the future.


Question 1: Do you think a National Care Service will help make sure good practice in services is shared across Scotland?

Yes

No

Please say why

Are there any risks that we need to consider?



Access to Care and Support

Access to social care is too complicated and difficult.  There are different professionals and organisations to deal with. People tell their story over and over again.

Assessment is based on having certain levels of need. Many people can only access support if their needs are really bad. It is not the same all over Scotland.  If people move Council area, they may not be able to get the same support.

We want to change care and support services to focus on giving people the support they need to live a full life.  Services should be provided early.

We will make it simpler to plan support and for people to move between different types of care as their needs change.

It would make sure that everyone uses the same language. The person using services and their family and friends should be at the centre of decision-making.



Question 2: If you or someone you know needed to access care and support, would you contact these places? Please tick the ones you would contact.

GP or another health professional Voluntary sector organisation, like a Carer centre Public sector organisation Drop in service in your community Council contact centre Contacting council by email or through their website Website or online A national helpline that can be contacted 7 days a week

Question 3: How can we better coordinate care and support? This means how we will bring all parts together. Tick all that you think.

Have one professional who co-ordinates everything for you Have one professional who talks to you, and then tells other people involved in your care and support what you have said Have local community or voluntary organisations who can talk to people involved in your care and support for you, when you want



Question 4: Tell us how you think support planning should work? Tick all that apply.

Me, my family and my unpaid carers should be involved in support planning If I want to, I should be able to get help from a community or voluntary sector organisation to plan my support. A professional working with me should decide what support I need, taking my views into account My support should focus on the tasks I need to carry out each day to be able to take care of myself and live a full life My support should focus on the things I want to live a full life There should be a light touch process for people who need a little bit of support or should everyone have the same support planning

Question 5: Do you think the partnership way of working will improve access to care and support?

Yes

No

Please explain why.

8 Right to breaks from caring Unpaid carers are people who provide care for another person. Breaks for unpaid carers are important. Caring roles can be very different. All carers need to be able to take a break. However, some may not need a lot of support for this. Breaks can be different. It could be a few hours off care at home. It could be a week or more of the cared-for person staying somewhere else. We plan to make it a carer’s right to have a break. Question 6: Do you think everyone should have the same support to take a break from caring? Should support be personalised to a person’s needs, or should it be a mix of both? 9

Using data to support care

There is lots of information available about people getting care and support. However, it is not always easily available.

Information about an individual is often held in lots of different places.  This makes it difficult for people providing care and support across health and social care to get up to date information.

People have to repeat their story to different parts of the system, because information is not shared.

We plan to create a social care and health record. This can be used by those who provide support, and by the person. We will ask for people’s permission.



Question 7: Do you think information about your health and care needs and support should be shared across the different services you use?

Yes

No

No preference

Please say why



Complaints and putting things right

It is important that people know how to complain. Systems are not clear. People are not aware of advocacy services available.

Systems for handling complaints are different in different areas.  Complaints do not always make services better the way they should. There should be one place to make a complaint all over Scotland.

Feedback and complaints should be used to understand the quality and safety of services.

Care providers will be required to show they have taken feedback and complaints on board when they are inspected.



Question 8: What changes do you think would make a new system of complaints work better? Tick all that apply

Charter of rights and responsibilities that says what people can expect from the service Single point of access for feedback and complaints about all of the system Clear information about advocacy services The same model for handling complaints for all services Addressing complaints initially with the body the complaint is about Clear information about next steps if a complainant is not happy A commissioner to protect the rights of people who receive care and support Other – please explain below



Residential Care Charges

When someone moves to residential care the council asks how much money they have. The council then decide how much they should pay.

We are looking at options for the cost of residential care. Councils may have to pay more money to provide personal and nursing care to people in residential care. We want everyone to be treated fairly.



Question 9: Most people have to pay for the costs of where they live such as mortgage payments or rent. To make sure things are fair should care home residents have to pay towards accommodation costs such as

(please tick all that apply): Rent Maintenance Furnishings Utilities Food costs Food preparation Equipment Leisure and entertainment Transport Laundry Cleaning Other –Please explain below:



Chapter Two: National Care Service

Councils have responsibility for providing social care support. The Scottish Government through local Health Boards, have responsibility for health care.

They ask local integration authorities to plan health and social care that is needed in local areas. Integration authorities are a partnership that brings together Health Boards and council care services.

There is no national responsibility for social care support like there is for health care. This has made some social care services unfair. There are good services in many places. However, this is not all over the country.

We plan to make to make the Scottish Government responsible for social care.  We will make a National Care Service. The National Care Service will have a responsibility for planning services and setting standards It will also be responsible for central work. This includes services getting better, workforce plans and keeping information.

It will deliver services for people who have high and complex needs. It will also plan and deliver services for those in custodial settings, such as prisons.

Community Health and Social Care Boards (CHSCBs) will be made to be the local delivery body for the National Care Service. They will work with the NHS, councils, and the third and independent sectors to plan and deliver services. 16

Question 10: Do you agree the Scottish Government should be responsible for the delivery of social care?

Yes

No

No preference

Please say why

Question 11: Should this be through National Care Service?

Yes

No

No preference

Please say why

17

Chapter Three: Scope of the National Care Service

Children’s services

Children’s services are services that benefit children. These include services for those who are in care or have left care, children with complex health conditions, young people involved in offending behaviour, or those with additional support needs.

Children’s social work and social care services is linked to adult services. It is important to have a whole family view.

Just now, local Integration Authorities and councils are responsible for children’s services. We plan for children’s social work and social care services to be in the National Care Service (NCS).

Healthcare

Primary and community health care is how most people first contact the NHS.  These services, include GPs, dentists, pharmacists and district nurses.

Integration authorities are responsible for planning health and social care. They want to avoid people needing hospital care. For example, better social care could help a person to manage their health condition at home.

We therefore plan that the National Care Service could take responsibility for a range of community health services.



Social Work and Social Care

Social work has a key role in services to support adults, children, and families. They manage risk as part of care planning. Social care services are then provided on the needs.

Social workers have a responsibility for checking and reviewing care to make sure needs are met. They also make sure people are safe.

We plan that all responsibilities for social work are under the National Care Service.  This could make things easier and make transitions better.

Nursing

Registered Nurses have an important role in delivering health and social care services.

It is important the conditions for nurses employed in social care are the same as nurses employed by the NHS.

Executive Directors of Nursing in the NHS provide leadership and check on standards of nursing.  During the pandemic they have also given advice to care homes.  The National Care Service could take over these things for social care nursing staff.  It could plan for nursing in social care.  It could also make sure nurses in social care have the same access to training as in the NHS.



Justice Social Work

Justice Social Work (JSW) services are important in managing and preventing offending behaviour and keeping communities safe. JSW works with people with a variety of complex needs.  It works with partners to support area based plans. However, services are not the same across Scotland.

Including JSW services in the new NCS could be positive. Services would be more consistent and have stronger links to health services.

However, including JSW may be difficult. It would mean changing complex funding and delivery methods. We would not want to mess up ongoing work. Therefore, if JSW is included in the NCS, it may be transferred later.

Mental Health Services

Mental health services include a wide range of activities and professionals.

Only some services are managed by Integration Authorities and this varies across Scotland. This can cause issues for staff and mean different standards of care for people

We plan that mental health services should be in the National Care Service to make sure they are the same across all of Scotland.



Prisons

In prisons Healthcare is the responsibility of the NHS, Social care is arranged by the Scottish Prison Service.

We plan that the NCS oversees social care for people in prison.

Alcohol and Drugs Services

Alcohol and drugs services are run by integrated authorities.

Each council area has an Alcohol and Drugs Partnership (ADP). The ADP is responsible for planning across issues such as education, treatment, and support for family members., People with alcohol/drugs problems can have complex needs that overlap services. Care and support should be joined up.

Many feel the system is focused on treatment. It should also be on prevention, recovery and wider integrated support services. People moving between services means they may also fall through gaps.

We are thinking about making changes to ADPs to make them more effective and whether they should become part of the National Care Service (NCS).



National Social Work Agency

Social work is complex. Social workers support people and families in their most challenging times. Most social workers are employed by councils.

Different organisations provide support for social workers. There are differences in pay and terms and conditions. There is no national workforce planning. This can make it difficult to have enough student placements.

More pressure on social work services also means the focus must be on people in crisis or with significant needs. This leaves less time for work to prevent difficult situations and for social worker training.

We plan that a new National Social Work Agency should be made. This would have national leadership on areas including social work qualifications, workforce planning, getting better, training and pay and grading.



Question 12: Do you agree all the areas should be in the National Care Service?

Yes

No

No preference

Question 13: What parts of mental health care should be delivered in a National Care Service? (Tick all that apply)

Primary mental health services, Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services, Community mental health teams, Crisis services, Mental health officers Mental health link workers Other – please explain below


Chapter 4: Reformed Integration Joint Boards: Community Health and Social Care Board

At present there are 31 integration authorities. They plan what care is needed in their area and deliver it with the NHS and Council.

Most integration authorities have an Integration Joint Board (IJB). They have members that can vote from the NHS and Council. Members also include social care providers, people who receive social care support, and unpaid carers. However, they cannot vote.

The Independent Review of Adult Social Care said that some of the current model was good. But it also said some areas need to be better. It felt that there was not enough partnership working and long term planning.

We plan for IJBs to be changed to become Community Health and Social Care Boards (CHSCBs).

They will deliver the National Care Service. This will be the only model of delivery of health and social care. It will make sure services are the same all over Scotland.

Community Health and Social Care Boards will be responsible to the Scottish Government. They will each have their own Chief Executive and staff. They will have board members of both locally elected members and local people. They will work together across Scotland and work with the NHS, council, and the community and third sectors to improve support for people. 24 Question 14: Should Community Health and Social Care Boards cover the same area as local councils? Yes No No preference Question 15: The Community Health and Social Care Boards will have members that represent local people. Who else should be on these boards? 25

Chapter 5: Planning and buying services

Planning and buying health and social care services are a key part of delivering better wellbeing in Scotland. The Integration Joint Board (IJB) plans and agrees a budget for the services it is responsible for. Then the IJB directs the council and Health Board to deliver those services and provides the funding to do so.

These services may be delivered by councils and Health Boards directly, or they may pay other companies or organisations to deliver them. There are differences in planning and buying services across Scotland.

Limits on money have resulted in support that is focused on costs rather than people.

We plan that the National Care Service (NCS) will be responsible for a Structure of Standards and Processes. This will make sure planning and buying of services is done in a person-centred way.

Services should support the needs of the individual and meets quality standards. They should support fair work and make sure services are the same all over Scotland.


Question 16: Should the National Care Service be responsible for planning and buying services to improve standards?

Yes

No

No preference

Question 17: Will it benefit people if complex and specialist services are managed by the National Care Service?

Yes

No

No preference

Please explain your answers below



Chapter 6: Regulation

National organisations that manage standards play an important role in making sure standards of social care and support are high. The role of checking both services and the workforce will be separate to the National Care Service (NCS).

We need modern checking processes. That will continue to make things better and the best for people.

Core principles for regulation and scrutiny.

We plan the following core principles.

1. Make sure we support human rights-based care. This has a positive impact on the quality of health and social care services.

2. Activity should be fair and targeted for those that need it. It should be based on research.

3. The NCS should seek to review, update, and improve an organisation and across the care sector on a regular and ongoing basis

4. There should be a strong link between the rules for the workforce and inspecting the services they work in.

5. Checking services should be done in partnership.

6. Checking services is important to make sure staff are qualified and skilled.

28

7. Checking services is key to making sure vulnerable people are safe.

8. We aim to reduce inequalities with an emphasis on people.

9. People should be involved in the development and delivery of checking services.

10. Checking services should take account of the law, Scottish Government policy, standards, and codes of practice.

Question 18: Do you agree with the list of principles?

Yes

No

No preference

Please explain your answers below



Strengthening regulation and scrutiny of care services

The powers of the Care Inspectorate are an important tool for keeping high standards. The Care Inspectorate checks on the quality of care and support services.

However, the shape of care has changed since the Care Inspectorate got these powers. More people are supported to live at home. Those who live in care homes have complex needs. It has raised issues of whether they are still the right powers.

We are planning to change the powers to make sure high standards are kept.

Question 19: Do you think the Care Inspectorate powers should be stronger?

Yes

No

No preference

Please explain your answers below



Market Oversight Function

Understanding the care market is important. This is about making sure that the right care services are in the right place and planning ahead to prevent good services needing to close.

An understanding of the care market involves gathering information and working with partners across the sector. We are thinking of giving the Care Inspectorate powers to provide this.

Question 20: Do you think the Care Inspectorate should have powers to better understand the care market?

Yes

No

No preference

Please explain your answers below

31 Enhanced powers for regulating care workers and professional standards The Scottish Social Services Council (SSSC) oversees the social services workforce. It is responsible registering most of the workforce. However, some groups are not registered. The SSSC’s powers are focused on individual workers rather than on employers. They are unable to make employers follow rules. We are considering giving the SSSC powers to address this. Question 21: What groups of care worker should be considered to register with the Scottish Social Services Council? Please explain your answers below 32

Chapter 7:  Valuing people who work in social care

Scotland’s health and social care workforce provide important support to people across Scotland every day. We need to do more to ensure that there is a greater understanding of the role that they play and care they bring every day to the job they do.

We need to grow the workforce as more people need support.

Fair Work

There are lots of service providers. Each is responsible for setting their workforce terms and conditions.

There is no way to set minimum standards for workforce conditions to service providers. This has led to differences in terms and conditions and low pay across the sector. Many workers feel undervalued and underpaid. They can be dealing with high workloads and stress.

We plan for the National Care Service (NCS) to take the lead in developing workforce quality standards. This could include rates of pay, employment contracts, and training.

We also plan for the NCS to develop and manage standards. Contracts will only be provided to services that support and meet these standards. 33

Question 22: Should the National Care Service take action to make pay, working conditions, and training and development for social care workers better?

Yes

No

No preference

Please explain your answers below



Workforce Planning

Planning for the workforce is complicated. There is a large number and lots of different staff. It is difficult due to not having the best and easy information.

The Independent Review of Adult Social Care said planning for the workforce across Scotland should be a priority for a National Care Service.

Training and Development

Training and development is different in different workplaces. Social Care services do not have to make staff get qualifications. Training and development of staff is not in contracts.

There are lots of issues about training and development. People are not always aware which qualifications are available and which they need to get.

The National Care Service should set training and development rules. They should support starting work in care and development for staff.

35

Personal Assistants

Personal assistants are individuals directly recruited by people in receipt direct payments and/or Independent Living Fund (ILF) funds. They play a key role in social care support.

We are unsure how many personal assistants there are in Scotland, we think there are around 6,000 funded via option 1 self-directed support and/or ILF.

Personal assistant support is not set by the Care Inspectorate. This makes it harder to speak with them and support them. There is no law for them to get training or support to do their role. Employing personal assistants can be a lot of admin and work.

We want to register all personal assistants in one place. We are also thinking about how the National Care Service (NCS) could support personal assistants.

We are thinking about how to help with support around admin that may mean more people use direct payments.



Question 23: Do you think that personal assistants should be required to register in one place?

Yes

No

No preference

Question 24: What other support might help personal assistants and people wanting to employ personal assistants? (Please tick all that apply)

All personal assistants would have the same job standards across the whole country Tell more people about the job of a social care personal assistant Ways to match employers with personal assistants who want work Jobs at different grades for personal assistants Recognise personal assistants as part of the social care workforce A free national phone line about self-directed support advice Enough support to make sure there are payroll services Other (please explain)



Giving your consultation answers

You do not need to read all, or answer all the questions, unless you want to. We know that different people will be interested in different issues. We have set out different parts of our proposals in different sections in this consultation.

We would like you to give us your answers by 2 November 2021.

You can fill out this consultation by answering the questions above and sending it to us by email or by post. Please also include the Respondent Information Form.

If you prefer, you can access a Word copy of the questions along with an Easy Read version of the Respondent Information Form in the supporting documents section of the website. Please send it back to us by post or by email. If you require a paper copy to be sent to you, please email us or call our call  0300 244 2425.

You can email us at: NCSconsultation@gov.scot

Or you can post your response to:

National Care Service Team Scottish Government Area GE-15 St Andrew’s House Regent Road EDINBURGH, EH1 3DG



If you would like to access the full consultation online, you can visit Citizen Space. However, this version is not in easy read. You can find this version at: https://consult.gov.scot/health-and- social-care/a-national-care-service-for-scotland

Handling your response

If you respond using Citizen Space, you will be directed to the About You page before giving your answers. Please tell us how you want your answers to be handled and if you are happy for them to be published. If you ask for your answers not to be published, we will do as you ask.

All respondents should be aware that the Scottish Government has to follow the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and would have to consider any request made to it under the Act for information about answers to this consultation.

Please complete and return the Respondent Information Form included in this document with your answers to the questions so we know whether you want us to publish your response or not.

To find out how we handle your personal data, please see our privacy policy: https://www.gov.scot/privacy/

Next steps in the process

If you have given permission for your answers to be made public, and after we have checked that they contain nothing offensive, your answers will be made available to the public at http://consult.gov.scot. If you use the Citizen 39

Space to respond, you will get a copy of your response by email.

After the closing date, we will look at all responses and considered them along with any other information we have. Responses will be published if we have been given permission to do so. An analysis report will also be made available.

Comments and complaints

If you have any comments about how this consultation exercise has been conducted, please send them to the contact address above or at NCSconsultation@gov.scot.

Scottish Government consultation process

Consultation is an essential part of the policymaking process. It gives us the chance to think about your opinion and expertise in an area where we think changes should be made.

You can find all our consultations online: http://consult.gov.scot. Each consultation gives details on the issues we are thinking about, as well as a way for you to give us your views, either online, by email or by post.

Responses will be looked at and used as part of the decision making process, along with a range of other available information and evidence. We will publish a report of this analysis for every consultation.



A National Care Service for Scotland - Consultation

RESPONDENT INFORMATION FORM

Please Note this form must be completed and returned with your response. To find out how we handle your personal data, please see our privacy policy: https://www.gov.scot/privacy/

Are you responding as an individual or an organisation? Individual Organisation Full name or organisation’s name Phone number Address

Postcode

Email

The Scottish Government would like your permission to publish your consultation response. Please indicate your publishing preference:

Publish response with name

Publish response only (without name)

Do not publish response

Information for organisations: The option 'Publish response only (without name)’ is available for individual respondents only. If this option is selected, the organisation name will still be published. If you choose the option 'Do not publish response', your organisation name may still be listed as having responded to the consultation in, for example, the analysis report.



We will share your response internally with other Scottish Government policy teams who may be addressing the issues you discuss. They may wish to contact you again in the future, but we require your permission to do so. Are you content for Scottish Government to contact you again in relation to this consultation exercise? Yes No

Individuals - Your experience of social care and support If you are responding as an individual, it would be helpful for us to understand what experience you have of social care and support. Everyone’s views are important, and it will be important for us to understand whether different groups have different views, but you do not need to answer this question if you don’t want to.

Please tick all that apply I receive, or have received, social care or support I am, or have been, an unpaid carer A friend or family member of mine receives, or has received, social care or support I am, or have been, a frontline care worker I am, or have been, a social worker I work, or have worked, in the management of care services I do not have any close experience of social care or support. Organisations – your role Please indicate what role your organisation plays in social care

Providing care or support services, private sector Providing care or support services, third sector Independent healthcare contractor Representing or supporting people who access care and support and their families Representing or supporting carers Representing or supporting members of the workforce Local authority Health Board Integration authority Other public sector body Other © Crown copyright 2021 This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at www.gov.scot Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at The Scottish Government St Andrew’s House Edinburgh EH1 3DG ISBN: 978-1-80201-316-0 (web only) Published by The Scottish Government, August 2021 Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA PPDAS920466 (08/21) w w w . g o v . s c o t