Category: NHS reports Version: Original URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2024/09/national-care-service-co-design-draft-ncs-charter-rights-responsibilities/documents/national-care-service-co-design-draft-ncs-charter-rights-responsibilities/national-care-service-co-design-draft-ncs-charter-rights-responsibilities/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-co-design-draft-ncs-charter-rights-responsibilities.pdf

National Care Service: Co-design of the draft NCS charter of rights and responsibilities September 2024

About the National Care Service

The Scottish Government is working with people and organisations across the country. Our aim is to improve community health and social care support in Scotland.

We want everyone to have access to consistently high-quality services wherever they live, and whenever they might need them.

That’s why we are introducing the National Care Service (NCS). We are shaping the NCS with the organisations and people who have experience of accessing and delivering these services.

Introduction

The Charter of Rights and Responsibilities (the Charter) will set out people’s existing rights and responsibilities when accessing support through the National Care Service.

It will also include information about how people can make a complaint, if their rights are not  met by the National Care Service.

The National Care Service consultation demonstrated strong support for a National Care Service Charter of Rights and Responsibilities. To co-design and develop the Charter, we have been working with the people who will be using it, to make sure it meets their needs.

This includes people with lived experience of accessing and providing community health, social work and social care support, as well as unpaid carers.

We have also engaged with stakeholders and completed desk research.

The Charter will be an important document in the development and delivery of the National Care Service. It will provide information about equality and human rights which are relevant to  the National Care Service.

All of the draft Charter is the product of co-design. This paper sets out the co-design process we have followed. It also links to further findings from each stage of co-design that have already been published on the Scottish Government website.

About the National Care Service Charter of Rights and Responsibilities

The National Care Service Bill, as introduced, sets out that the Charter will include as a minimum:

• the rights and responsibilities of people accessing National Care Service support and those with an interest in their wellbeing such as a family member or carer and any other category of person the Scottish Ministers consider appropriate to include; and • information on processes which will provide recourse if Charter rights are not met

The National Care Service Bill provisions say that the Charter is not to: • create new rights, • impose any new responsibilities, or • change any existing rights or responsibilities. We have worked to make sure the co-design process has been as inclusive as possible because we want the Charter to represent everyone who uses it. We have listened to the views of seldom heard groups as part of this.

The co-design process

We are co-designing the Charter in 3 stages:

• understanding • sense-making • agreeing

We have now completed the first two stages and have produced an early draft of the Charter. We will test this draft as part of the next stage – the agreeing stage.

Over 500 people were involved in the first 2 stages of co-design. This included:

• people accessing and delivering community health, social work and social care support • lived experience panels • stakeholder organisations and their members

Stages of co-design

Stage of co-design Dates What we did Understanding  April – June 2022 Initial designs for the Charter Sense-making  September 2022 – December 2023 Develop a draft Charter Agreeing January 2025 – NCS launch Further testing and improvements to the Charter

Stage 1: Understanding

The understanding stage took place between April and June 2022. We gathered information about:

• what people knew about their care-specific rights • how people wanted to use the Charter and how it could help them • previous experience of using charters • thoughts on what would help make the Charter as accessible as possible

Using the information we gathered, we were better able to understand how we could design the Charter to:

• support people to understand their rights when accessing National Care Service support • explain the pathway for upholding those rights if things go wrong

Stage 2: Sense-making

The sense-making stage ran from September 2022 to December 2023 and was completed in 2 rounds.

The first round ran from September 2022 to March 2023. During this, we developed the initial themes identified in the understanding stage. We worked with people with wider and more diverse experiences of community health, social work and social care, including people providing care and support. The result was the structure and content for an early draft of the Charter.

The second round of sense-making co-design ran from June 2023 to December 2023. During this round, we worked with people with lived experience of accessing and providing services to further develop the draft Charter. This was to ensure that the content accurately reflected what people had told us.

You can read the early draft Charter we produced from sense-making here: Draft NCS Charter (parliament.scot).

Stage 3: Agreeing

We are planning to run the agreeing stage in 2024/25. It will involve:

• adding more detail from other National Care Service co-design work, such as the complaints process and a definition of community health • updating the draft Charter to include information about certain children’s services  and justice social work services as appropriate • updating parts of the current draft for any changes to legislation or policy • testing the draft to improve usability, language, structure and format, including visual design • developing alternative formats and ways to access the Charter

We will continue to update and refine the draft Charter until close to the launch of the National Care Service. This will mean there will be more opportunities for people with lived experience to improve the Charter.

Methodology

We used different ways to gather people’s views, opinions and knowledge as part of the co-design of the Charter. This includes:

• individual and group interviews • feedback from existing lived experience panels • official-led and stakeholder-led workshops • the 2023 NCS regional forums

In addition, Healthcare Improvement Scotland undertook a ‘Gathering Views’ exercise on the draft Charter.

Recruitment

We have deliberately worked to recruit people with diverse views and ensure that seldom heard voices have been involved throughout.

We used protected characteristics, as defined in the Equality Act 2010, to target recruitment for the understanding and sense-making stages.

We also included other marginalised or stigmatised groups including:

• people who have experience of homelessness • people who have experience of substance use • people who have been the victims of crime • people who have experience of mental ill health

We are still considering the future of justice social work and certain children’s services within the National Care Service. However, we wanted to make sure the views of people who access these services were included from the start.

We worked with organisations representing people from these groups to ensure that their preferences for engagement, as well as trauma informed practice guidelines, were followed.

What we learned

Some of the main themes and views that we heard during the understanding and sense-making stages are outlined below.

1. We heard that the Charter should be accessible and as easy as possible for everybody to use. People should be able to easily see how it relates to them.

We heard from people that they wanted a short, simple and accessible document that is easy to use and access. For example, it should be available in places like GP surgeries, libraries, schools or included in any sort of National Care Service induction pack.

Other points around this included: • technical information should be included in separate documents for people that want further detail • the Charter must be in plain English and available in different languages and formats • the Charter should be used to positively influence staff and societal views of supported people • some people thought that the rights and expectations in the earlier drafts of the Charter do not always reflect people’s experience of support as it currently exists

How we have used this

This information helped us to create the draft Charter. The new draft of the Charter is in plain English and we will continue to develop the Charter in the agreeing stage to make sure that it is as clear and simple as possible. We want to make the Charter available in many different formats and languages as well as different physical places and online, to make sure that everyone who needs it can access it.

2. People thought the Charter should be clear about who it is for and how it can be used.

People told us that they wanted a Charter that clearly described what the National Care Service is and what it does. They also said that it is important that the Charter is clear about what its purpose is and who it is for.

Other points around this included:

• the Charter should include a list of example services to help people understand if their support is covered by the Charter • the Charter should emulate aspects of the Social Security Charter including the ‘This Charter was created by’ section • the Charter should clarify the difference between rights and expectations • the ‘Who is this Charter for?’ section should be as inclusive as possible and there should be a child-friendly version of the Charter • rights should be clearly listed in one place to help people see what their rights are at a glance and emphasise the importance of their rights

How we have used this

We used this feedback to help us decide what information should be in the Charter and how we organise it. The new draft of the Charter includes all of these suggestions, and aims to be clearer about who it is for and how it can be used. It also includes a clearer list of rights near the start of the document. As decisions are made about which services will fall under the National Care Service, we will continue to develop the Charter to make sure that it is clear who it is for and how it can be used.

3. People said that the Charter must be inclusive and promote the dignity of supported people. It should introduce rights to equal opportunities set out in the Equality Act (2010).

People told us that the National Care Service should go further than simply treating people equally and should treat people with dignity, respect, warmth and compassion. The Charter should include examples to help people identify with the rights and expectations.

Other points around this included:

• groups that are not protected by the Equality Act also face inequality, discrimination and stigma. This includes rural and island communities, people with experience of trauma or of drug and alcohol use. • good support is based on good relationships between supported people and support providers and is built on mutual respect • staff, and organisations that represent them, sometimes share experience of being exposed to violent and aggressive behaviour. However, many said that these behaviours often stem from traumatic experiences, medical conditions or emotional stress • some people raised concerns that some supported people may not be able to adhere to any responsibilities and that the inclusion of responsibilities in the Charter could be a barrier to much needed care and support • staff sometimes feel undervalued and the Charter should recognise the highly skilled work they do by providing information on how supported people should work with them

How we have used this

We used this feedback to continue to make sure we have the right information covered in the draft Charter. The new draft includes more information on what we mean by equality, dignity and respect and how it applies to different groups, including those listed above. It also includes a new mutual respect section to reflect the views of people that said that good support is built on good relationships.

4. It was suggested that support networks are important in making sure that people’s rights are upheld and that they receive the care they need.

We heard that care support is essential to the realisation of the right to Independent Living in Article 19 of the UNCRPD1. People also said that independent advocacy is very important and different types of advocacy can help in different situations.

1 The UNCRPD is an international human rights treaty which is not currently in domestic law so the Charter cannot include the explicit right to independent living at this time. The draft Charter does however include domestic legal rights which may reflect the tenets of Article 19.

Other points around this included:

• people told us that community is important to different people in different ways • we heard that care homes are people’s homes and people must be able to have visitors, if they want, in the same way that they would if they were receiving care in a non-residential setting • people said that support for people accessing care at home needs to respect the needs of other people in the home as well as the privacy of the supported person • unpaid carers and young carers said that the Charter should explicitly state that it applies to them and should include reference to rights that are specific to them • some people were unsure about what independent advocacy support was, and some called for a right to independent advocacy for everyone to be included 2 • people want the Charter to include information on how to access independent advocacy

How we have used this

We have used this feedback to make sure we continue to include the right information about support networks, community and access to independent advocacy. The new draft of the Charter sets out the importance of support networks and community for people accessing support and includes examples of what this might look like. It also includes more and clearer information on the topics that people asked for in co-design including independent advocacy and rights for carers.

5. We heard that many people want to be more involved in decisions on their care support and some don’t feel they have enough control.

People spoke about care being done to them rather than with them and how they want to work in partnership with people providing care. We also heard that social care assessments can be intimidating and the Charter should provide information to make the process less so.

Other points around this included:

• staff told us that they are sometimes legally obligated to limit the choices of some people, for example where people pose a danger to themselves or others • the Charter should include information on supported decision making and explanations of what guardianship and power of attorney are • many people do not always get the information they need to make the best choices about their care • sometimes information is not accessible and it must be provided in a way that people can understand • people want to know more about how their information will be used and processed by the National Care Service and its support providers, and how they can request personal information held about them

2 The Charter cannot create new rights but the draft does summarise existing legal rights, including the rights of some people for independent advocacy to be made available in specific situations.

How we have used this

We used this information to continue to make sure the Charter is providing the right type of information and advice to people. The new draft of the Charter reflects this information including rights to be involved in decisions. It sets out what is meant by power of attorney and guardship and includes information on supported decision making. It also includes details on how people should expect to receive information in an accessible way.

6. People told us they often don’t know how to complain or who to go to if things go wrong, and they are sometimes scared to make a complaint for fear of repercussions.

We heard that often people want to give positive feedback, as well as complaints but don’t know how. They want the Charter to include clear instructions, including a visual diagram to help them understand the process.

Other points around this include:

• some people thought the Charter should set out the option to apply for judicial review in some circumstances where domestic legal rights are not upheld • some, however, expressed concern that judicial review can be complex, time consuming and costly making it an inaccessible route to recourse for many

How we have used this

We have used this to inform how we present information and guidance about making complaints or other types of feedback. The suggestions people made for this section have been shared with colleagues working to co-design  complaints and redress for the National Care Service. Once this has been developed further, these recommendations will help to make up the information included in this section in the final version of the Charter.

Further findings from different stages of the Charter co-design have been published on the Scottish Government website:

• findings from the understanding stage of Charter co-design – How we are embedding human rights into the National Care Service • findings from the first round of sense-making stage of charter co-design – An update on how we are designing the Charter of Rights and Responsibilities • findings from the 2023 NCS Regional Forums – Realising rights and responsibilities: Summary of findings from regional forums • findings from the Health Improvement Scotland ‘Gathering Views’ exercise – Gathering views on the draft National Care Service charter of rights and responsibilities | HIS Engage

What’s next

Next steps in the development of the Charter The development of the Charter will now move into the agreeing stage of co-design. This will run until close to the launch of the National Care Service.

The agreeing stage of Charter co-design will be an important part of the co-design of the National Care Service. This will include considering how we use the evidence we have gathered during the co-design of the Charter so far.

What’s next for the National Care Service The Scottish Government remains committed to delivering a National Care Service to improve quality, fairness and consistency of provision that meets individuals' needs. We are also working to make improvements to the social care system now. The National Care Service Bill passed Stage 1 in the Scottish Parliament in February 2024. This stage is where MSPs decide whether they agree with the general principles of the Bill by: • hearing views • writing reports of what they have heard • voting on whether the Bill should go on to the next stage The Bill will now go on to Stage 2. This is where MSPs can make changes (calledamendments in Parliament) to the Bill. We will continue with engagement and co-design as the Bill progresses through Parliament. This commitment will continue throughout the establishment of the National Care Service. We will be doing additional work with people from groups we know are currently under-represented in our work so far. In the meantime, we will continue to make improvements across the social care sector, including improving terms and conditions for our valued workforce - making it an attractive profession and bringing even more talent into the sector. Getting involved We want to hear from as many voices as possible as we shape and develop the new  National Care Service. If you’d like to share your experience or views, you can join our Lived Experience Expert Panel. If you join the panel, you’ll be invited to take part in different things like: • surveys • interviews • helping come up with ideas about what the National Care Service could look like • helping us understand what our research is telling us • helping us make sure we’re designing the NCS to meet everyone’s needs

For more information about the National Care Service, visit gov.scot/ncs. Crown copyright 2024 This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at www.gov.scot Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at The Scottish Government St Andrew’s House Edinburgh EH1 3DG ISBN: 978-1-83601-779-0 (web only) Published by The Scottish Government, September 2024 Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA PPDAS1505530 (09/24)