Category: NHS reports Version: Original URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2024/07/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work/documents/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-making-sure-voice-heard-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work.pdf

National Care Service: Making sure your voice is heard – seldom heard voices co-design work July 2024 2

About the National Care Service

The Scottish Government is working with people and organisations across the country. Our aim is to improve social work, social care and community health services in Scotland.

We want everyone to have access to consistent, high-quality services wherever they live, and whenever they need them.

That’s why we are introducing the National Care Service (NCS). We are shaping the NCS with organisations and people who have experience of accessing and delivering these services.

Introduction

We have been working with organisations who support people from groups and communities who often have barriers to engaging with government.

We wanted to engage with these groups as they have not been as involved as other groups in our previous co-design work.

We wanted to further discuss topics that emerged during our co-design work last summer. You can read the reports we published after the co-design work last year on gov.scot.

This work will help us make sure that we are co-designing the National Care Service in a way that will help everyone across Scotland.

The findings from this co-design work will be used to inform decisions about the design of the National Care Service programme.

This report is about findings relating to the Making sure your voice is heard co- design theme.

About Making sure your voice is heard

Our co-design work for the National Care Service has focused on different themes. Making sure your voice is heard is one of these themes.

Making sure that people’s voices are heard when accessing care will empower people to:

• claim their rights • make the choices to live the lives they want • be involved in decisions about their care

It is essential people providing care also have an effective voice. We want the National Care Service to respond to people’s needs and capture the ideas of the people working in it.

3

During the co-design activity for this theme, we have looked at 3 important areas:

• access and support planning: we want to improve the way people can access support • independent advocacy: we want to enhance independent advocacy provision • complaints and redress: we want to develop a complaints service that is fair, effective and consistent

This report relates to these areas and what people told us during our most recent co- design work.

Co-design sessions

We ran co-design sessions  with people from different backgrounds and communities. The people who took part accessed a range of services, including justice social work services and children’s services.

At the sessions we discussed a range of topics and not just those relating to the Making sure your voice is heard design theme.

Our sessions were held in:

• Inverness • Aberdeen • Glasgow • Kilmarnock • Kirkcaldy • Cumbernauld • Grangemouth • Edinburgh • Larkhall • Irvine • Perth • Blantyre

We also held some sessions online for people who could not travel.

To run these sessions, we worked with:

• Alzheimer’s Scotland • SACRO • Simon Community • LGBT Health and Wellbeing • MECOPP (Minority Ethnic Carers Of People Project) • CEMVO (Council of Ethnic Minority Voluntary Organisations) • Scottish Commission for People with Learning Disabilities • Action for Children • Glasgow Disability Alliance BAME network • Inclusion Scotland's People led policy panel 4

Through this work, we have been able to reach communities and groups who we’ve not fully engaged with until now. This includes, among others:

• Gypsy and Traveller communities • LGBTQI+ communities • ethnic minority communities • people with experience of homelessness

What we learned - access and support planning

1. There can be a lack of trust in social care services from seldom heard groups

A common theme we heard was a deep-rooted lack of trust in social care services. This was especially the case with people who had experience of homelessness. GPs were seen as a trusted voice by many. People said they relied on GPs as a way to access medical and social care support.

Other points around this included:

• there can be long waiting times to get a GP appointment • some groups of people, such as those without a fixed address, find it difficult to register at GPs. This can stop people getting the support they need • community link workers were seen as very important as they are also trusted people • some people feel forced into residential care and this can cause longer term harm, such as worse mental health • some people with experience of homelessness worried about speaking to people in authority. They felt it could put their housing or benefits at risk

Here are some of the things people said during our discussion:

“What I really want is to be able to keep my husband at home, it could be a trailer or a chalet...but I want it to be accessible because he would never want to leave the community and live anywhere else” - MECOPP session participant.

“We are seen as worthless, that’s how people see us. Being homeless, being addicts. People think I am aggressive, that’s how I have been labelled now, it’s been written down and it will dictate everything about what I get in the future” - Simon community session participant.

“I work with a woman who travels 100 miles to a doctor because it’s so hard to get through the barriers to get a trusted doctor” - MECOPP session participant.

“I understand social workers, but we shy away from them. In the Gypsy and Traveller community it is a taboo because historically the community has had bad experiences. Social work takes kids away and we stay away from them” - MECOPP session participant. 5

How we will use this

We will consider how we can build trust in seldom heard communities around accessing social care and support planning. We will also think about how trust impacts other aspects of social care including independent advocacy and complaints.

2. There is a perceived lack of understanding of the needs of diverse groups which can make social care support inaccessible

People told us that social care support can be inaccessible for those in the Gypsy and Traveller community or people with no fixed address. They also said that stigma and prejudice can impact on how you receive support. For example, we heard there is a general lack of understanding in the workforce around Gypsy and Traveller communities, or how transgender lives are lived.

Other points around this included:

• a lack of support in housing services can lead to health conditions, which in turn can lead to more support being needed • respecting people’s gender preferences for their care and support is particularly important for LGBTQI+ people and communities with stricter gender roles • preferences should be included in assessments, care planning and complaints processes • there is a need for increased awareness of LGBTQI+ issues and bodies when someone is trying to access care • systems and services need to be designed with a great level of flexibility to support people with different support systems, families or friendship networks

Here are some of the things people said during our discussions:

“Getting support should not be dependent on having a permanent address” - MECOPP session participant.

“What we need should be the priority. Not what we do in our spare time”  - Simon community session participant.

“You phone for an appointment at the doctor’s – I only smoke weed – and they put me down as a heroin addict; branded me as an aggressive person” - Simon community session participant.

“My life would improve not having to explain my gender identity and support systems to doctors – they should know the differences; I’m not their teacher and it should not be my emotional labour to do this” – LGBT Health and Wellbeing participant.

6

How we will use this

We will look at how people’s identities can be better reflected within support planning arrangements as we work towards the development of a consistent approach within the National Care Service. This will include consideration of any associated workforce development and training requirements.

We will also consider this evidence when developing policy for independent advocacy and complaints.

What we learned - independent advocacy

1. Advocacy services should understand the unique challenges faced by specific groups and offer specialised support.

We heard that different groups might experience different barriers when accessing social care support services. Because of this, they might need different approaches to help them engage in advocacy services.

Other points around this included:

• some people said peer advocacy was important because a shared experiences can create understanding and trust • some people felt that because of their background they often face unique challenges when navigating supports systems. This means it is important to have access to advocates who understand these issues • some people felt there is a need for more specialised training across support services in domestic abuse so more effective support can be offered

Here are some of the things people said during our discussions:

“This answer will be unsurprising but I think the best way to remove barriers is to provide an LGBTQ+ specific service” – LGBT Health and Wellbeing participant.

“I wanted to engage in advocacy to help me navigate/potentially complain about NHS mental health services. However the thought was emotionally exhausting and I was worried how this would impact my care. As with all services, uncertainty around whether I would be understood as a queer person and uncertainty whether the specific issues I experience would be understood” – LGBT Health and Wellbeing participant.

“Having someone listen to you who has lived experience and understanding is so valuable” – Glasgow Disability Alliance session participant.

How we will use this

We will consider how we can make sure there is good signposting to advocacy support within communities across Scotland. We will consider how we can improve information so people can understand the different models of independent advocacy. 7

This should include peer advocacy for people who want support from someone with lived experience.

2. A professional advocate could be a useful support for people, including when making a complaint

We heard the ideal advocate to support people through a complaint would be aware of equalities legislation and also of people’s rights to social care support. They would also have knowledge of the community they were supporting. People also said that an advocate should have a good knowledge of the complaints system

Other points around this included:

• people said effective independent advocacy could be a way to empower people to engage with support systems • we also heard that independent advocacy could help make sure voices are heard and needs are addressed • some people said making a complaint on your own without any support can add stress to already stressful situations

Here are some of the things people said during our discussions:

“Having no power in your own life or in relation to services is a way of life for disabled people – it’s our everyday reality. If we are to use any complaints system we need support and advocacy. It’s all very well being here together today, but when it’s yourself, it’s harder to speak up!” – Glasgow Disability Alliance session participant.

“How to formally complain, someone to take my complaint and structure it so it receives proper attention. An authority which the organisation can’t gaslight, demean or ignore” – LGBT Health and Wellbeing session participant.

“It’s more emotional when it’s about yourself – it’s much harder. Sometimes you need someone to fight on your behalf- because it is a fight and an uphill struggle” – Glasgow Disability Alliance session participant.

How we will use this

We will consider how we can provide more detailed information and guidance on how independent advocacy can help to support people. We will consider what information and guidance could be designed for advocates to help them support people when making a complaint, as we develop the National Care Service complaints service.

8

3. There are many instances where people might look for support by advocacy services to address a wide range of issues

People said it was important that advocacy workers have a good understanding of rights, entitlements, and the barriers and challenges that someone might face. They also said people should also be supported to manage their expectations of what an advocate can and cannot do.

Other points around this included:

• people said there are many triggers for when people want to access advocacy services, including when people find themselves in difficult situations • some people might look to an advocate when they want mediation when things aren’t working, but this isn’t something an advocate can do • some people feel alone while navigating through their care and support journey, and would like someone to support them through that • some people said it was challenging and complex trying to access and navigate multiple services to receive support

Here are some of the things people said during our discussions:

“Sometimes there used to be advocacy that was funded especially but at other points it was only for people with learning difficulties or mental health problems. So advocacy needs to be for everyone who needs or uses social care” – Glasgow Disability Alliance session participant.

“My advocacy worker told me there is no point in bringing that up and that they can only deal with one agreed issue. But that’s impossible when all the problems are related” – Glasgow Disability Alliance session participant.

“An advocacy service should work for its clients, not choose who they want to work with because it will lead to more council/govt money. That's not my definition of independent” – LGBT Health and Wellbeing session participant.

How we will use this

Information on and signposting to independent advocacy should be made available to people, so they are clear on what an advocate can and cannot do. Future co- design work will explore how to make this information accessible to people. We will also explore any gaps in existing independent advocacy provision.

4. There is a lack of support and advocacy for unpaid carers

People said a lack of support for unpaid carers left them feeling exhausted and unable to care for loved ones properly. This can often mean people who receive care feel like a burden to their carer and feel the need to seek out additional support for themselves. 9

Other points around this included:

• some people in the Gypsy and Traveller community did not know about the support available to unpaid carers • many people in different communities said that there is a cultural expectation for families to support each other and that it is rare to receive any support from someone outside their community • some people were not aware that they could be identified as an unpaid carer and were entitled to support

Here are some of the things people said during our discussions:

“I feel like a burden to my daughter… I lean too heavily on her” – Alzheimer’s Scotland session participant.

“I have been a carer all my life. First caring for my husband and now caring for my daughter and her son, I have no idea what my rights are” – MECOPP session participant.

“What will make me feel like I have choice and control is if I know I can speak to someone and that someone could make things happen” – MECOPP session participant.

How we will use this

We will explore independent advocacy for unpaid carers in future co-design work. We will also consider exploring if there is a lack of advocacy support available to unpaid carers, a lack of awareness of support that is available, or a combination of both issues.

What we learned - complaints and redress

1. A perceived complex and inaccessible complaints process stops people from making a complaint. We heard some people believe it is not worth their time to make a complaint. This is because they feel it will be too complicated or no action will be taken as a result. We learned some groups of people might experience extra barriers to making a complaint. People from the Gypsy and Traveller community talked about not wanting to cause “a fuss” because of stigma they may experience due to their background. Some people talked about being afraid to make a complaint because of cultural differences or having an insecure immigration status.

Other points around this included:

• some people with dementia do not want to complain and many “just get on with it” because they feel that complaining will not make things better 10

• people with dementia talked about needing support from a third party to make a complaint, usually a close family member, due to the nature of their condition • people accessing social care support said they were not given accurate timelines for dealing with their complaint, or kept up to date when those timelines changed • people said it is important to have transparency at every step of the journey • there is a need for equal and accessible information on making a complaint

Here are some of the things people said during our discussions:

“The thing that stops me from making a complaint is not knowing where to complain, I don’t always know” - Glasgow Disability Alliance session participant.

“There needs to be better structure and mechanisms to updating us on the process - let us know the timescales, even if they have changed and will take a while” – Glasgow Disability Alliance session participant.

How we will use this

We will consider how different health conditions and circumstances can affect people in accessing the complaints system, and how to make sure it is accessible to all. We will also consider how to make sure people get clear, accessible and accurate information about making a complaint.

What’s next

What’s next for access and support planning

We will use what people have told us to inform how we can ensure a consistent approach to access and support planning within the National Care Service which fully takes account of people’s identities.

What’s next for independent advocacy

We will use what people have told us to inform our approach to improving independent advocacy provision. We want independent advocacy to be a way for people to have their voices heard and participate fully in decisions about their care. This means increasing and improving independent advocacy provision. We will co- design the best way to do this.

We will use the information we have gathered to inform the next phase of co-design for independent advocacy, the sensemaking phase.

What’s next for complaints and redress

We will reflect on how existing complaints processes can be improved ahead of the creation of the new complaints service for the National Care Service. As part of this, we will look at how good examples in the existing processes can be used in future. 11

We will look at how the complaints service for the National Care Service can be accessible to everyone.

We will consider the role of guidance and training for staff to ensure that they feel supported and confident when dealing with complaints.

What’s next for the National Care Service The Scottish Government remains committed to delivering a National Care Service to improve quality, fairness and consistency of provision that meets individuals' needs. We are also working to make improvements to the social care system now. The National Care Service Bill passed Stage 1 in the Scottish Parliament in February 2024. This stage is where MSPs decide whether they agree with the general principles of the Bill by: • hearing views • writing reports of what they have heard • voting on whether the Bill should go on to the next stage The Bill will now go on to Stage 2. This is where MSPs can make changes (called amendments in Parliament) to the Bill. We will continue with engagement and co-design as the Bill progresses through Parliament. This commitment will continue throughout the establishment of the National Care Service. We will be doing additional work with people from groups we know are currently underrepresented in our work so far. In the meantime, we will continue to drive forward improvements across the social care sector, including improving terms and conditions for our valued workforce - making it an attractive profession and bringing even more talent into the sector. Getting involved

We want to hear from as many voices as possible as we shape and develop the new National Care Service (NCS). If you’d like to share your experience or views, you can join our Lived Experience Expert Panel. If you join the panel, you’ll be invited to take part in different things like:

• surveys • interviews • helping come up with ideas about what the NCS could look like • helping us understand what our research is telling us helping us make sure we’re designing the NCS to meet everyone’s needs

For more information about the National Care Service, visit gov.scot/ncs. © Crown copyright 2024 This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at www.gov.scot Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at The Scottish Government St Andrew’s House Edinburgh EH1 3DG ISBN: 978-1-83601-422-5 (web only) Published by The Scottish Government, July 2024 Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA PPDAS1454838 (07/24) w w w . g o v . s c o t