Category: NHS reports 
Version: Original
URL: https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/research-and-analysis/2024/08/national-care-service-governance-representation-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work/documents/national-care-service-governance-representation-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work/national-care-service-governance-representation-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work/govscot%3Adocument/national-care-service-governance-representation-seldom-heard-voices-co-design-work.pdf

National Care Service: 
Governance and 
representation – seldom heard 
voices co-design work
August 2024
2 
About the National Care Service 
The Scottish Government is working with people and organisations across the 
country. Our aim is to improve social work, social care and community health 
services in Scotland.  
We want everyone to have access to consistent, high-quality services wherever they 
live, and whenever they need them.  
That’s why we are introducing the National Care Service (NCS). We are shaping the 
NCS with organisations and people who have experience of accessing and 
delivering these services.
Introduction 
We have been working with organisations who support people from groups and 
communities who often have barriers to engaging with government. 
We wanted to engage with these groups as they have not been as involved as other 
groups in our previous co-design work. 
We wanted to further discuss topics that emerged during our co-design work last 
summer. You can read the reports we published after the co-design work last year 
on gov.scot. 
This work will help us make sure that we are co-designing the National Care Service 
in a way that will help everyone across Scotland.  
The findings from this co-design work will be used to inform decisions about the 
design of the National Care Service programme.  
This report is about findings relating to the Governance and representation co-design 
theme. 
About Governance and representation 
The Governance and representation co-design design theme is working to co-design 
the National Care Service Board. We want to make sure that people with lived 
experience and other stakeholders are central to developing National Care Service 
policies. 
Scottish Ministers have agreed with COSLA and the NHS that they will share 
responsibility for oversight of the National Care Service, and for making 
improvements to how it works. 
To do this, they have agreed to create a National Care Service (NCS) Board. 
3 
The overall aim of the board will be to ensure that social work, social care support 
and community health services are: 
•
consistent
•
fair
•
human rights-based
•
underpinned by an effective complaints process
•
include enhanced independent advocacy provision for people
It will also support communities to benefit from reformed local delivery of services. 
Co-design sessions 
We ran co-design sessions with people from different backgrounds and 
communities. The people who took part had experience of a range of services. 
To run these sessions, we worked with: 
•
Alzheimer's Scotland
•
CEMVO
•
LGBT Health and Wellbeing
•
Scottish Commission for people with Learning Disabilities
•
SACRO
The co-design sessions focused on the membership of the NCS Board and looked 
at:  
•
who should be on the board
•
how someone with lived experience could be supported to be a member of
the board
•
how the board should be structured to make sure that people feel comfortable
to be part of discussions and decision making
What we learned 
1. People want more information about how the board will work and
what being a member would involve.
People said they wanted clarity about the membership and make-up of the NCS 
Board. They also said they wanted information about what is expected from 
members. This would help people decide if they wanted to become a board member. 
Other points around this included: 
•
people need to know how members will be recruited and what the role of
people with lived experience will be
4 
•
people want members with lived experience to have an influential voice and
role in decision-making
•
participants felt that a knowledge and understanding of the integrated health
and social care sector was needed, so that board members can contribute in
a meaningful way
•
members of the board with lived experience should include those with
experience of the integrated health and social care sector
Here are some of the things people said during our discussion: 
“Understanding the remit of the board is important to ensure that we fit the skillset of 
members to ensure they can do what they need to do."  
– member of SDWG (Scottish Dementia Working Group)
“A lack of experience and knowledge can be disempowering. It acts as a barrier to 
engage meaningfully.” 
– member of NDCAN (National Dementia Carers Action Network)
“Experience brings its own unique understanding of systems.” 
– member of SDWG (Scottish Dementia Working Group)
How we will use this 
This finding tells us people want to know more about what would be expected from a 
NCS Board member. People also think it is important for the board to have members 
with lived experience of integrated health and social care services. We will continue 
to build on this in future co-design to make sure that members have the right 
experience and knowledge to fulfil their role on the board.  
2. The process for people to apply for and then join the NCS Board
is very important.
People told us they want all board members to receive training on topics that 
promote inclusion. They also said lived experience members should have access to 
training on topics they are less familiar with than other members. 
Other points around this included: 
•
some people said making sure all members of the NCS Board get the same
training will promote equality and parity of esteem for all members of the
board
•
people suggested examples of good training which would promote inclusion of
all members of the board
•
training examples included equalities training and trauma informed training,
training on decision making processes and information on how the board will
function
•
people also told us it would be good to offer training around assertiveness,
communications, digital skills and financial skills
5 
 
 
Here are some of the things people said during our discussion: 
 
“You need to have ongoing support and development, provide clear paths for 
professional development and support systems such as mentorship programs" 
- member of SACRO 
 
How we will use this 
 
These suggestions will help us to develop our approach for the training support that 
will be available to members of the board and will help to inform recruitment and 
onboarding of potential members.  
 
 
3. Board meetings should be inclusive and designed around what 
members need to take part.  
 
People told us that board meetings should be run in ways that let all members take 
part in a way that is best for them. Many said that they value face-to-face meetings to 
help build relationships.  
 
Other points around this included: 
 
• people said that face-to-face meetings would give people a better chance to build 
relationships 
• some people suggested that regular meetings should be hybrid to provide 
flexibility, while some sessions should in person either once or twice a year 
• some suggested that meetings should be held in places across Scotland  
• people said that having information ahead of meetings, a list of confirmed 
attendees and a point of contact to ask questions would help all board members 
take part 
• people also said that holding informal sessions before and after meetings would 
be good 
 
Here are some of the things people said during our discussion: 
 
“It [meetings] needs to be varied between in-person and online because being in-
person is good for our health and to get to know the people that you’re working with. 
Getting out and about is good for us.”  
- member of SCLD – (Scottish Commission for People with Learning Disabilities) 
 
“Consider everyone’s needs in the broadest terms and make all processes as 
accessible as possible for everyone and avoid treating individuals with specific 
needs differently, wherever possible, by using broadly accessible policy and 
practice." - member of Alzheimer's Scotland 
 
 
 
6 
How we will use this 
We will discuss and develop these suggestions and ideas in future co-design to 
ensure that we do not miss opportunities to be inclusive to all members.   
4. It is important to have the right people on the board, with the
right number of people too.
People feel that the size of the board needs to enable everyone to take part fully. 
They said there needs to be clarity on the decision-making processes. Some people 
suggested that having a lived experience advisory board would ensure broader 
representation and could advise the NCS Board.  
Other points around this included: 
•
people suggested the board should have between 10 and 12 members and
that having too many people would make it hard for everyone to be heard
•
some people said that a small membership would mean voting on issues
would not be fair or meaningful
•
we heard views that the board chair should have the right experience, and
that responsibility for chairing could rotate
•
we heard that decision processes must be clear for lived experience members
to fully contribute as board members
•
people discussed several benefits to having a lived experience advisory
board, including allowing the board to hear a range of views, letting the board
connect with others and having a more comfortable environment for sharing
•
people feel it would be unreasonable for board members to be able to
represent ‘lived experience’ as a whole
Here are some of the things people said during our discussion: 
“It’s important that we’re [lived experience board members] not just listened to, but 
that we’re heard.”  
- member of SDWG (Scottish Dementia Working Group)
“The last thing we want is a board swamped with people …who are reluctant to 
change.”   
- member of DCAN (National Dementia Carers Action Network)
“This is a way to be more inclusive and to hear from more voices. If you can’t be on 
the [NCS] Board then [an advisory board] is a way for you to contribute to the 
conversation.”  
- member of SDWG (Scottish Dementia Working Group)
How we will use this 
We will explore these suggestions further and test how they could work through 
future co-design. By continuing to do this work with people with lived experience, 
7 
 
we’ll be able to better support people to make sure that all members of the board are 
able to contribute in a meaningful and supportive way. 
 
 
5. Board members will need the right support to be able to 
contribute to its work.   
 
People with lived experience want support when they are working as board members 
to do their job effectively. People expect compensation for their time and expenses 
they incur for working as board members. 
 
Other points around this included: 
 
• people said support to be a board member should be ongoing, and go beyond 
when they first become a member 
• we also heard upskilling and professional development would help board 
members to better engage  
• some people said support should match people’s needs and we heard some 
suggestions on what support might be needed, such as IT equipment and 
mentoring 
• people expected that they should be compensated for their time, including time 
for preparation and attending meetings, travel expenses and caring costs  
• some people shared concerns about the financial impact on their benefits if they 
were paid for sitting on the board 
 
Here are some of the things people said during our discussion: 
 
“This NCSB will involve smart, powerful people and that can be intimidating for 
some. There should be support to make it less intimidating for others.”  
- member of SCLD – (Scottish Commission for People with Learning Disabilities) 
 
How we will use this 
 
Supporting all members is crucial to the board fulfilling its aims. We will use these 
comments and suggestions to further explore through co-design ways to ensure 
practical support is available.  
 
What’s next 
 
What’s next for Governance and representation 
 
We will use the findings and suggestions from the seldom heard groups in upcoming 
co-design group sessions. We want to make sure that people who have lived 
experience continue to inform and co-design the NCS Board. We want to do this so 
that the NCS Board works in a way where all members can take part fully and 
meaningfully. 
 
 
8 
 
What’s next for the National Care Service 
 
The Scottish Government remains committed to delivering a National Care Service 
to improve quality, fairness and consistency of provision that meets individuals' 
needs. We are also working to make improvements to the social care system now. 
The National Care Service Bill passed Stage 1 in the Scottish Parliament in February 
2024. This stage is where MSPs decide whether they agree with the general 
principles of the Bill by: 
• 
hearing views, 
• 
writing reports of what they have heard, 
• 
voting on whether the Bill should go on to the next stage. 
The Bill is now at Stage 2. This is where MSPs can make changes (called 
amendments in Parliament) to the Bill. 
We will continue with engagement and co-design as the Bill progresses through 
Parliament. This commitment will continue throughout the establishment of 
the National Care Service. 
We will be doing additional work with people from groups we know are currently 
underrepresented in our work so far. 
In the meantime, we will continue to drive forward improvements across the social 
care sector, including improving terms and conditions for our valued workforce - 
making it an attractive profession and bringing even more talent into the sector. 
 
Getting involved 
 
We want to hear from as many voices as possible as we shape and develop the new 
National Care Service (NCS). If you’d like to share your experience or views, you 
can join our Lived Experience Expert Panel. If you join the panel, you’ll be invited to 
take part in different things like:   
   
• surveys  
• interviews   
• helping come up with ideas about what the NCS could look like   
• helping us understand what our research is telling us   
helping us make sure we’re designing the NCS to meet everyone’s needs   
 
For more information about the National Care Service, visit gov.scot/ncs.  
© Crown copyright 2024
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to 
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.scot 
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at 
The Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House
Edinburgh
EH1 3DG
ISBN: 978-1-83601-532-1 (web only)
Published by The Scottish Government, August 2024
Produced for The Scottish Government by APS Group Scotland, 21 Tennant Street, Edinburgh EH6 5NA
PPDAS1481218 (08/24)
w
w
w
.
g
o
v
.
s
c
o
t
