Category: Alliance manifesto Version: Easy Read URL: https://www.mencap.org.uk/sites/default/files/2024-07/AllianceEasyReadFinal.pdf

1

Leading Change for Everyone

Easy Read Manifesto On July 4th, there is going to be a General Election. People will get to vote for MPs to go to Parliament in Westminster. MPs speak up for people from their area and will help make laws that affect everyone. This document is our easy read manifesto. It will tell you what we think is important and why you should vote for us on July 4th. A Manifesto is a document Political Parties use to show people what they believe in. We are the Alliance Party. We believe Northern Ireland needs to be fair for everyone.

We are a cross-community party.

This means we want to represent everyone, not just Nationalists or Unionists. We believe Northern Ireland can be better for everybody who lives here. 

Alliance Party Leader

Our leader is Naomi Long. She is from East Belfast.

Alliance Party Deputy Leader

Our deputy leader is Dr Stephen Farry. He is from North Down. 

Right now, the Northern Ireland Assembly can stop working when either the biggest Unionist party or the biggest Nationalist party decide to stop working together. We want to change that so that no one party can stop the government from working.

The Northern Ireland Assembly cannot make this change on its own. We need MPs at Westminster to change this. The Alliance Party wants Northern Ireland to have a stable government that keeps working for everyone.

We want to keep a positive relationship between Northern Ireland, Britain and Ireland. We think everyone has to work together for Northern Ireland to be successful.

Many people have been hurt by the Troubles. We believe they should get the truth and justice they are looking for. Change for Northern Ireland 

We believe the UK Government has not been giving Northern Ireland enough money for our public services. We want Northern Ireland to be funded based on what we need.

Taxes are money everyone sends to the Uk Government. This money pays for public services like the NHS, roads and schools. We want taxes to be fairer so we all pay our fair share. This means increasing taxes for the super wealthy.

We want to make it more difficult for companies to avoid paying tax. We also want taxes to be used to encourage companies to be more environmentally friendly.

We want people who get welfare benefits to have enough money to buy food, heating and other essentials.

Alliance wants parents to have more support from the government. We want childcare that all families can afford. Finances 

The economy in Northern Ireland needs more investment to be healthier and more productive.

We believe businesses need more support locally as well.

Economy Things that can help the economy are:

· Better Wi-Fi across the country.

· More help for small businesses.

· More opportunities for people to try new careers – such as through apprenticeships or re-training courses.

· Lowering costs for the tourism industry

· Making our economy more environmentally friendly now so we can save money later on 

Green New Deal

The Climate Crisis means that the world needs to be more careful with the environment and how we look after nature. Burning fossil fuels like oil can release harmful emissions. Emissions are gases that can be bad for nature or affect the air we breathe.

The Alliance Party wants a Green New Deal. This is a plan to make the environment safer and healthier. We want to burn fewer fossil fuels and use more clean energy. Clean energies are renewable, like wind or solar energy.

We also want to stop animal cruelty. We want wild animals to have a safe place to live and we want to ban hunting animals with dogs. 

Immigration is when people move into a country. Our immigration system deals with people who come to Northern Ireland from other countries.

Alliance believes that we should make it easier for people to move here when they want to help our businesses and communities.

When people face danger in the countries they live in, we should also help them to come to the UK for safety. Migration 

UK Political Reform, Human Rights and Equality

The government has a responsibility to protect everyone’s rights and keep them safe.

Alliance believes that people shouldn’t be discriminated against because they are: · Disabled · Children · Lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender · Part of another group

Alliance will ensure everyone is protected equally. We will also help make a fairer system for electing new governments.

That will include letting people vote in elections when they turn 16. 

The EU is the European Union. It is a group of countries in Europe that work closely together.

Leaving the EU has damaged Northern Ireland and made our people poorer.

Alliance believes we should work more closely with the EU.

That will include making it easier to do business with other countries in Europe.

It will also make it easier to buy medicines for animals in Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland and the EU 

InternaƟonal Aﬀairs and Defence

Alliance believes that the UK should work closely with other countries to help solve the world’s problems.

We should send more money to help countries facing poverty and climate change.

We should also support peace in places like Ukraine, Israel and Palestine. 

Thank you for reading!

Please use your vote on July 4th

If you need any help or more information please contact us.

Phone: 028 9032 4274

Email: alliance@allianceparty.org

Website: https://www.allianceparty.org/