Category: Greens manifesto Version: Easy Read URL: https://greenparty.org.uk/app/uploads/2024/06/Green-Party-2024-General-Election-Manifesto-Easy-Read.pdf

Why we want you to vote Green at the Election on Thursday 4th July 2024 EasyRead version About this leaflet 1 More about the Green Party 2 What we know 4 Homes for everyone 7 Health 8 Social care 11 The economy 12 Taxes and borrowing 14 What is in this leaflet Green energy 16 Work 18 Social care and support 19 Nature 21 Protecting animals 22 Food and farming 23 Transport 25 Education 28 Arts and sports 29 Human Rights 31 A more peaceful, fairer 33 and greener world People from other countries 37 Now, it’s over to you 39 1 This is the Green Party easy read Manifesto, which is a leaflet that says what we want to do for the country and how we plan to do it. On Thursday 4th July there is an Election where you get to vote for the MP in your area. The chosen MPs then go to Parliament to speak up for you and make new laws. To vote you need to be on a list called a register. You will then get a polling card through the post. This tells you where to go to vote. For more details please see: greenparty.org.uk About this leaflet To Do 2 The Green Party has been getting stronger and stronger. We tell the truth, aim high and offer hope for people like us and who vote for us. We know this because we have 5 times as many Green councillors now on 170 Councils all around the country. These people are helping make your community greener and fairer. And more Green MPs in Parliament will do the same. In this election we want to do well. We urgently need more Green MPs to get more done about the Climate Emergency. More about the Green Party 3 We need to stop more of our services and natural resources, like water, being sold off. We need them owned again by all of us. We can then start to mend so much that is broken. And we can help make a fairer greener country. Now, it’s over to you You can choose a fairer future for us all. Vote for real hope and real change. Vote Green on Thursday 4th July. 4 In the Green Party we know that millions of people are really worried about the future. There is lots of money in this country but: ● more and more people have to use food banks ● schools and hospitals are falling down ● people haven’t got enough money to pay their bills What we know 5 ● lots of people are homeless ● people can’t get a hospital appointment, see a GP or see a dentist. On top of all that we have Global Warming. The world is getting hotter and that is bringing a lot more problems. The Green Party’s promise to you is that all this can change. We can make a greener, fairer country together. A country where we are all safer, happier and more fulfilled. 6 But to do this we need more MPs who can make brave choices and do the things in this Manifesto. Green MPs will fight hard every single day to do this for you and all of us. 7 What we know Everyone needs a warm, safe home but so many people are homeless or living in short term places like hotels. What we will do We will: ● get Councils and Government working together to make sure people have homes in the right places ● make sure homes have proper insulation so they are warm and cheap to run ● make sure homes have solar panels and heat pumps ● get more new social homes to rent at prices people can afford ● stop people buying social homes so they can still be rented out to people who need them ● make sure people can afford the rent and can’t easily get kicked out. Homes for everyone 8 What we know We all know the NHS has not had enough money or it has been wasted by spending it on private companies. Our promise is to see health and social care get enough money to do a good job. What we will do We will make sure: ● you do not have to wait so long for appointments or treatment ● you can see an NHS dentist ● children and people with not much money can see dental nurses ● you can see your GP the same day Health 9 ● we pay NHS staff more ● people are treated equally and fairly. Mental Health We will make sure: ● people with mental health problems have more rights ● people with mental health problems can get treatment as quickly as if you had any other medical problem ● there is more support for school children with their mental health or learning disability. End of life We will make sure: ● there is a new law to allow people to die who say they really want to stop their suffering ● there are proper safeguards. 10 HIV We will try to: ● stop any new people getting HIV by 2030. 2030 11 What we know We all know the social care system has not had enough money or staff for a long time. We know there are lots of people who can’t get any care. We know it is not working well. What we will do We will make sure: ● people do not have to pay for care ● we pay staff more ● people can stay in their own homes and be more independent. Social care 12 The economy is about how the countries money and resources work and how they are spent. This includes making things and who owns things like water or electricity. What we know We know that letting private companies run things like our water, sewage, gas, trains or electricity has failed. This is called privatisation. Privatisation has allowed people to get very rich and give us all a very poor service. The economy 13 We are against privatisation and want these things to be owned by us all. This is called public ownership or public services. What we will do We will make sure: ● lots more money goes into making the economy greener ● oil companies will pay more tax to pay for this ● trains, water and energy companies are owned by us all as public companies ● people are trained to work in these new ways ● local people can have shares in local energy like wind farms. Shares 14 What we know Public services do not have enough money and have suffered because of cuts. But there are lots more rich people, the number of billionaires has gone up from 29 to 171 in the last 14 years. This is not right. What we will do We will make sure: ● that very rich people will pay more tax ● any money you make or get will be taxed fairly Taxes and borrowing CLOSED 15 ● that rich people will pay the same National Insurance as everyone else ● we support small businesses and local communities to go green ● we use this money or borrow more to pay for all of the things in this Manifesto. 16 What we know We are not doing things quickly enough to change Global Warming. We need to make sure our energy is green and it needs to be done sooner than the plans at the moment. What we will do We will make sure we have: ● most of our energy from wind by 2030 ● more wind farms at sea and on land ● more solar power ● more batteries to store power ● community owned local energy. Green energy 2030 17 Fossil fuels These are fuels from the ground like oil and gas. They cause a lot of Global Warming. We will: ● stop the new drilling for oil and any other fossil fuel projects ● not give money to fossil fuel companies ● tax fossil fuels from this and other countries. Nuclear power We want to shut down nuclear power as it is unsafe and much more expensive than green power. 18 What we know Lots of people can buy less now with their wages. This needs to change. What we will do We will make sure we have: ● new workers rights including the right to strike ● companies where the boss can only earn 10 times the money paid to the lowest paid ● a minimum wage of £15 an hour ● equal rights for all workers starting as soon as they start work ● a 4 day working week as soon as we can. Work 19 We want a country that treats everyone properly, equally and fairly. At the moment lots of children, older people, people with learning disabilities and other disabled people can’t afford to eat, heat their homes or live a decent life. This is part of the cost of living crisis. What we will do We want to: ● increase Universal Credit by £40 ● give child benefit to all children in a family ● end the bedroom tax ● eventually have a basic pay for everyone so they are free to start a business, train and live their lives in dignity. Social care and support 20 Disabled People Disabled people, including people with learning disabilities, have the right to lead the same lives as everyone else. What we will do We want to: ● raise disability benefits by 5% ● stop the unfair tests people are asked to do to get Personal Independence Payment, known as PIP ● stop carers and disabled people on benefits being treated unfairly ● have free school transport for 16 to 18 year olds with special educational needs or disabilities. 21 Nature What we know If nature is not doing well, we are not either, as we depend on nature for a lot of things. And at the moment nature in our country is doing badly. We need to look after nature and the environment better. What we will do We will fight to: ● have a new law giving nature its own rights ● stop sewage in our rivers and seas ● give some land and sea back to nature ● stop killing bees using pesticide ● have a new law to make the air cleaner. 22 What we will do We will fight to: ● have a new organisation protecting animals ● stop people killing animals for fun ● protect life in the sea ● stop killing badgers ● stop factory farming ● stop keeping farm animals in cages. Protecting animals 23 What we know Our food at the moment is causing problems. People eat unhealthy food that causes health problems. Growing food is damaging nature. We will work with farmers to change this. What we will do We will fight to: ● pay farmers more to be green ● keep soil healthy ● get cleaner rivers ● pay farmers to use less chemicals Food and farming 24 ● give school children a free meal every day and free breakfast clubs up to year 6 ● teach children about food and how to grow and cook it ● make sure no good food is wasted. 25 What we know To be green we need to use transport that makes less carbon. At the moment, getting around causes a lot of carbon. Public transport has been cut and is used less. What we will do We will fight to: ● have better, cheaper public transport so everyone can get around ● have more bus and train services ● have free bus travel for people under 18 ● have more electric transport. Transport 26 Safer getting about More walking and cycling is better for us all. What we will do We will: ● have new cycle paths and footpaths ● think how to use streets differently to get less traffic and more community use ● try to get half of trips done by walking or cycling in England. Flying Flying is causing more pollution and rich people are causing more. What we will do We will: ● tax people who fly a lot 27 ● stop planes if you can catch a train that takes less than 3 hours ● not allow more or bigger airports. 28 What we know Going to school should give people a love of learning and doing the best they can. This does not happen for a lot of children at the moment. What we will do We will: ● spend more money on schools ● pay teachers more ● give grants to people going to higher education like university ● stop tuition fees ● stop testing as it doesn’t do any good, and scrap OFSTED. Education 29 What we know Arts and sports help everyone. They also bring in a lot of money to the country. What we will do We will fight to: ● have more money to support community sports, arts and culture ● keep local things like: ▬sports grounds ▬museums ▬theatres ▬libraries ▬art galleries ● take away VAT on these things. Arts and sports 30 The Media This is how we get our news, from things like newspapers and radio to TV. At the moment a lot of the media is controlled by very rich people who don’t even live here. They can just take profits and can have harmful content. What we will do We will fight to: ● change the law so that no one person or company can own more than 1 in 5 news outlets ● make sure the changes happen asked for in a report called Leveson. This was a report that wanted to make the media better. Leveson Report 31 What we know Our Human Rights are so very important for us all. We will always fight for our Human Rights and laws. What we will do We will fight to: ● have a government that speaks up for all different voters equally ● change the House of Lords to have a House with people who have been voted for ● let 16 year olds and people who live here vote. Human Rights 32 We will stand up against: ● hate crime ● violence towards women and girls ● people being sexist ● treating people with different faiths badly. We will fight to: ● scrap laws that stop people’s right to protest ● allow trans and non-binary people to say who they are ● help the public trust the police more ● pay for new courts. 33 What we know There are a lot of wars at the moment that could get bigger. Global Warming is happening faster than we thought. What we will do Green MPs will work for: ● the UK to work with other countries towards peace, standing together and protecting Human Rights ● people who break international laws to go to court ● people to decide for themselves how their country is run ● more support for Ukraine ● rejoining the EU as soon as it is right. A more peaceful, fairer and greener world 34 Israel and Palestine What we know The Hamas murders of hundreds of Israelis were horrific. But so too are the war crimes of the Israeli forces in Palestine where thousands of innocent people have been killed. What we will do We will push for: ● the fighting to stop ● the end to selling guns and bombs to Israel ● trying harder to get the people captured by Hamas, called hostages, released ● making Israel give back Palestinian land ● equal rights for both Israeli and Palestinian people ● giving money to the UN aid organisation again 35 ● supporting South Africa’s proposal to the International Court about how Israel has broken the law on war crimes. Nuclear weapons What we know Most countries do not have nuclear weapons and they are still safe. What we will do Green MPs will work for: ● the UK to sign the treaty stopping nuclear weapons and get others to stop having them as well ● getting rid of the nuclear weapons we have ● not buying any more ● getting other countries’ nuclear weapons out of our country 36 ● International organisations to do more about peace building ● International organisations saying they would not use nuclear weapons first. Aid to other countries What we know A lot of poorer countries are going to have problems going green. They are also having more problems like floods and heat caused by Global Warming. What we will do Green MPs will work for: ● more aid to go to these countries to help them go green ● more aid to the new loss and damage fund. 37 What we know We welcome what people from other countries bring to us here. They are called immigrants, we want to help them settle and stay here. What we will do Green MPs will work to: ● end to being unfriendly to immigrants by government ● make it easier for people to bring their married partners here ● have safer ways for people to come here who are escaping danger in their own country ● scrap the Home Office and replace it with a department that works well for immigrants ● not lock up immigrants unless they are dangerous People from other countries 38 ● allow them to have public money where suitable ● let people who are asking to stay here to be allowed to work here until their case has been decided. 39 You can choose a fairer future for us all. Vote for real hope and real change. Vote Green on Thursday 4th July. Now, it’s over to you Artwork includes material from the Inspired EasyRead Collection and cannot be used anywhere else without written permission from Inspired Services. www.inspired.pics Promoted by Chris Williams on behalf of The Green Party, both at PO Box 78066, London, SE16 9GQ