Category: Labour manifesto Version: Easy Read URL: https://labour.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/Labour-MANIFESTO-UK-2024.pdf

Easy read summary Easy This document tells you what we believe in and why we think you should vote for us. 2338_24 Reproduced from electronic media. Promoted by David Evans on behalf of the Labour Party, both at 20 Rushworth Street, London, SE1 0SS. 3 It is time to change Britain We are the Labour Party. Our leader is Keir Starmer. Britain really needs change. The government now has caused big problems for the country and everyone in it. We can change Britain and start to build it up again. We can give people hope for a better future for them and the country. This is a summary of our manifesto. It tells you what we will do if we become the next government. Our website is www.labour.org.uk if you want to find out more. 4 The 5 things we will work on to build Britain up again 1. Growing the economy now and for the future The economy is about things like money, businesses and buying and selling things. Some of the main things we will do: We will look after and spend money for the country very carefully to help our country do well. We will have very strong rules about that. We will have a plan to make the economy stronger in every part of the country. This will make everyone better off. Not just a few people. 5 We will make Britain the best place to start and grow a business. We will work with businesses in a new way. This will help them to do well and to create good jobs for people in our country. We will help Britain to make more things to use in our country or to sell to other countries. This will create many new jobs. We will spend £7.3 billion on that. We will make new laws so that local people in England have more say in decisions to make their area better. Like decisions about transport and housing. Better transport and housing Trains at the moment are run badly by companies. We want the government to run trains instead. We think this will be better and cheaper for everyone. 6 We will have a plan for the next 10 years to get better roads, transport and other important things the country needs. Our plans include: • Making roads good and safe for everyone. • Better bus services for local areas. • Changing towns to make them better and building new towns. Many people cannot afford their own home. We will change this by building 1.5 million new homes. That includes more housing that is cheaper to rent or buy. Like social housing. We will make it easier for people to buy their first home. For example, we will make sure that local people have the first chance to buy new homes. 7 We will make life fairer for people who rent their home. And give them more rights. For example, we will stop unfair rules where people can be told to leave their home without a good reason. Supporting more people to work and do well Too many young people and adults are out of work or they are not earning enough. We will set up a new service to help people to get good jobs and do well. That includes supporting more disabled people to find and keep a job. We will make work better, fairer and safer for people. For example, by stopping unfair ways of working, like zero hour contracts. This is when a worker does not know how many hours they will be working, or when. 8 We will make sure that people get some basic rights at work as soon as they start. Like paid time off for parents and sick pay if people are ill. We will make sure that all groups of people are paid a fair wage that they can live on. That includes disabled people, women and people of all races. We will make tax rules much fairer. For example, by making sure that people and businesses pay the tax they should. We will not make working people pay more tax, like National Insurance. We will give older people enough extra money every year for their government pension. 9 2. Better ways to get our electricity and heating to save the environment And making our waters clean and safe The environment is the earth we live on, the countryside and other things around us. The world uses too much petrol, coal, gas and other things that damage the environment. We need to stop the damage. Some of the main things we will do: We will be leaders in saving the environment at home and in the world. We will work with businesses to get our electricity and heating in better ways for the environment by 2030. For example, we will start many new projects to make electricity and heat from the sun, wind and water. 10 We will spend money to help homes to be warmer and cheaper to heat. We will spend an extra £6.6 billion on that. Our plans for the environment will help to: • Save people money by making electricity and heating bills cheaper. • Grow the economy by creating 650,000 new jobs across the country. • Make more of our own electricity in the UK so we have to get less from other countries. • Support more people to use cars that run on electricity. • Support farmers in Britain to grow more food. • Help to keep our animals, plants, seas and other things in nature healthy. We will also make water companies clean up our rivers and seas. At the moment, some water companies are making our waters dirty and unsafe. 11 3. Making our communities better and safer for everyone There is too much serious violence. And many people don't feel safe in their own communities. Some of the main things we will do: We will make the police stronger, better and safer. For example, we will have many more police officers working in local communities to deal with crimes. We will do more to stop behaviour that makes life hard for other people. Like people making too much noise, selling drugs or fighting in the streets. We will make a plan to stop crime where people use knives to hurt or kill other people. That also means doing more to help young people to stay away from crime. 12 For example, we will start projects to have more support for young people in every community. That includes mental health support and support with jobs. We will do more to stop violence that happens to women and girls. For example, we will have special teams of people in every police force to support women and girls. We will make sure that schools teach young people about healthy relationships and sex. We will do more to support people if crime happens to them. For example, we will make it quicker for crimes to go to court. At the moment, many people have to wait a very long time for this. 13 4. Making sure that everyone in Britain has the chance to do well Some of the main things we will do: We will do more to give every child and young person a better start in life. For example, we will make a plan to stop so many children being poor. We will have free clubs in every primary school where children can have breakfast if they need to. We will open 3,000 more nurseries where young children can play and learn. We will get an extra 6,500 new teachers for important subjects. 14 We will look at how to make education better to help children get ready for work and the future. We will work with schools, parents and other experts on this. We will make sure that young people in every school can get mental health support if they need it. We will help workers to have the great skills that Britain needs to do well. For example, we will set up some new colleges to help young people to get better training and jobs for the future. And we will make sure that all 18 to 21 year olds can get training or support to find work. Some children are disabled or need extra support at school. We will help schools to better support these children and help them do well. 15 5. Fixing the NHS so it works well for the future And giving people better support. This is called social care The government at the moment has broken the NHS. We have saved the NHS before and we will do it again. Some of the main things we will do: We will work straight away to make sure that people can get the care they need more quickly. For example, we will have 40,000 more health appointments in England every week. That means an extra 2 million NHS operations, scans and appointments every year. That includes more scans for people who could have cancer. This will help to find big health problems early on and save lives. 16 We will make it easier for people to see a doctor or dentist. For example, there will be 700,000 more appointments for people who need urgent care from a dentist. We will train many more doctors. We will make sure that people can see a doctor in person if they want to. And we will start better ways for people to book a doctor’s appointment. We will make it quicker and easier for people to get mental health support. There will be 8,500 extra mental health staff to help with this. We will make sure that the NHS is owned by the government, not private companies. This is so everyone gets the care they need. 17 Better support for people Many people at the moment have been left without the support they need. That means support to live at home, look after themselves or do other important things. This support is called social care. We will start a better way for everyone in the country to get good support in their homes and communities. We will call this the National Care Service. Some other ways we will make Britain better Better voting and politics We will make sure that people in the government work in an honest and fair way for the country, like they should. We will set up a new team of people from outside the government to make sure that happens. 18 We will help more people to choose who runs their local areas and the country. For example, we will change unfair rules that make it harder for some people to vote. And we will give 16 and 17 year olds the right to vote. Having a stronger and safer relationship with the rest of the world First, we will look carefully at everything we need to do to keep our country safe. This will help us to be ready for any new problems that might happen. We will also work in a better way with other countries to make the world safer and fairer for everyone. For example, we will strongly support NATO. This is a group of countries that help to keep each other safe. 19 We will make life better for the people in our army, navy and air force who work to keep our country safe. For example, we will make sure they get support with mental health, jobs and housing after they leave. We will keep supporting Ukraine. And we will work straight away to help get lasting peace in the Middle East. We will make new agreements with other countries to buy and sell things. They must be the right agreements to help our country grow and do well. We will support poorer countries by giving them money.