Category: Ulster Unionist manifesto
Version: Easy Read
URL: https://www.mencap.org.uk/sites/default/files/2024-07/UUP%20Easy_Read_Manifesto%202024.pdf

2. The Union
Ulster Unionist Party - Easy Read Manifesto
We support Northern Ireland's place in the UK, benefiting our economy, health, and security, and seek a strong voice in Parliament.
3. Windsor Framework
3. Windsor Framework
We oppose the Northern Ireland protocol, support Northern Ireland staying in the UK, and strive for a strong and safe future.
4. Economy
We support City Deals, aim to lower business taxes, and
improve skills and training for job success.
We support City Deals, aim to lower business taxes, and imp
rove skills and training for job success.
5. Taxation & Pensions5. Taxation & Pensions6. Health
We want better police and justice systems, stronger
sentences for serious crimes, and support victims.
Ulster Unionist Party - Easy Read Manifesto
7. A Fairer Society
7. A Fairer Society
We promise to keep pensions growing for older people, support gender equality, gay rights, and advocate for carers and people with disabilities.
8. Agriculture & Environment
We aim to improve health services, reduce treatment
waiting times, and ensure fair pay for health
workers.
We support farmers and rural communities with fair payments, 
reduced red tape, and environmental initiatives like planting m
ore trees.
9. Justice & Legacy
We promise to maintain the 'triple lock' for pensions,
implement fair taxes, and ensure financial security for
retirees.
10. Defence & SecurityWe support the UK Armed Forces, advocate for Northern Ireland's key role in defence, and believe in increased defence spending.11. Veterans
We support veterans and their families, ensuring fair
compensation and necessary assistance.
12. Immigration
We support veterans and their families, ensuring fair
 compensation and necessary assistance.
We support controlled immigration, welcome refugees, and
combat illegal immigration and human trafficking.
We support controlled immigration, welcome refugees, and combat illegal immigration and human trafficking.
13. Artificial Intelligence
10. Defence & Security
We support Artificial intelligence for change, investment in Artificial intelligence research, and ensure its ethical and fair use.
Ulster Unionist Party - Easy Read Manifesto
14. Your Ulster Unionist Candidates
Meet our candidates who will represent you in Westminster.
Vote for change on 4th July.
Let's create a better future for Northern Ireland.
Published & Promoted by the Ulster Unionist Party, 2-4 Belmont Road, Strandtown
Hall, Belfast BT4 2AN
We want to be an inclusive party so please
contact your local candidate or the party if
you would like us to explain any of these
policy items. 
Party Headquarters
2-4 Belmont Rd, Strandtown Hall, Belfast,
BT4 2AN Tel: 028 9047 4630
Email: uup@uup.orgPublished & Promoted by the Ulster Unionist Party, 2-4 Belmont Road, Strandtown Hall, Belfast BT4 2AN
INCLUSION
