Category: 2113-Information for all-17:Layout 2 (inclusion-europe.eu) Version: Original URL: https://www.inclusion-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Easy-to-read-checklist-Inclusion-Europe.pdf

Ambitions. Rights. Belonging.

Inclusion Europe European movement of people with intellectual disabilities and their families

Avenue des Arts 3, 1210 Brussels, Belgium

+32 25 02 28 15 Co-funded by secretariat@inclusion-europe.org the European Union

www.inclusion-europe.eu @InclusionEurope @InclusionEurope youtube.com/InclusionEurope Easy-to-read checklist

Checklist to make sure your document is easy to read

1. How the document looks like

Numbers Are the pages numbered? The front cover does not need a number, but all the other pages should be numbered. The number should be on the bottom right of each page.

Writing Is the writing Arial, size 14 or bigger?

Alignment Is the text aligned left?

Images Are there images next to the text to help people understand what the text is about?

Are the images easy to understand? Titles Are the titles clear and easy to understand?

Are the titles bold?

2. The sentences and words

Sentences Does each new sentence start on a new line?

Ambitions. Rights. Belonging.

Inclusion Europe European movement of people with intellectual disabilities and their families

Avenue des Arts 3, 1210 Brussels, Belgium

+32 25 02 28 15 Co-funded by secretariat@inclusion-europe.org the European Union

www.inclusion-europe.eu @InclusionEurope @InclusionEurope youtube.com/InclusionEurope

Are the sentences 1 or 2 lines long?

Are most of the sentences positive?

Words Are the words simple?

Are difficult words explained more than once? Difficult word should be explained every time they are used. Are some words split on two lines? It is not good to split a word on two lines.

Are numbers written as digits? It is good to write numbers as digits not words.

3. How the information is ordered

Is the main information easy to find?

Is the information in order and easy to follow? For example, if one thing happens after the other, it should be written like this in the text. For example: Susi ate pizza. Then she went to play football.

Is each paragraph about one topic?

Are examples used to explain things?

Are bullet points used for lists? It is better to use bullet points than commas.

When the text says he or she, is it clear who it is talking about?