Category: Scotland travel plan Version: Original URL: https://www.transport.gov.scot/media/48989/scotlands-accessible-travel-delivery-plan-progress-report-2019-2020.pdf



transport.gov.scot Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland

Contents

Part 1: The Role of Accessible Travel in Response to COVID 19. 5 Transport Scotland        5 Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland     7 Third Sector Organisations       7 Part 2: Progress on the 2019-2020 Annual Delivery Plan    9 Impact of COVID 19        10 Progress Update - Passenger Assistance      10 Progress Update - Aviation     . 11 Progress Update - Bus        12 Progress Update – Signs, Wayfinding and Information  . 13 Progress Update – Thistle Assistance      14 Progress Update – Clear Pathways    .. 15 Progress Update – Taxi and Private Hire Cars (PHC)  .. 15 Progress Update – Hate Crime      16 Part 3: The Future Delivering Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework  . 17



Ministerial Foreword This is a Progress Report on the 2019-2020 Annual Delivery Plan for Scotland’s ten year Accessible Travel Framework1 published in 2016. This progress report is not the document I had envisaged when I signed off the first Accessible Travel Framework Annual Delivery Plan in June 2019. Working through the challenges that the pandemic has, and continues to present, has rightly changed the focus of our work over the last year. This year COVID-19 meant that work on the eight priorities contained in the 2019-2020 Annual Delivery Plan2 were paused at the end of March 2020, as resources were pivoted to mitigating the impact of the pandemic. Accessible travel officials in Transport Scotland have since been focussed on working across Government to embed the principles and practices of accessibility into the Transport Transition Plan3 and our other Covid-19 response programmes. This was the right thing to do in the face of an unprecedented global emergency, and has brought unexpected benefits, enabling us to respond flexibly to the significant and evolving challenges disabled travellers have faced. More about this work and the lessons we have learned is set out in Part 1 of this document. Nevertheless, I am proud to say we have made progress on a number of the things we set out to achieve in the 2019-2020 plan, and updates on these are provided in Part 2 of this document. Achievements I would like to highlight include resourcing a significant expansion of the Thistle Assistance scheme, rolling out a transport focussed Hate Crime Charter pilot earlier in the year, and supporting the incredible work transport operators have been doing on Passenger Assistance both on our rail and ferry networks. Turning to the years ahead, I would like to reiterate that our vision, set out in Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework, that all disabled people can travel with the same freedom, choice, dignity and opportunity as other citizens, will remain our guiding principle (see Annex A). The COVID-19 pandemic has not changed that, although it may have changed what it looks like in practice, and the steps we have to take as a government to achieve it.

1 http://accessibletravel.scot/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Going-Further-Scotlands-Accessible-Travel- Framework-Full-Report.pdf 2 https://www.transport.gov.scot/media/45098/transport-scotland-communications-corporate- publications-accessible-travel-annual-external-delivery-plan-2019-2020-120720191634.pdf 3 https://www.transport.gov.scot/coronavirus-covid-19/transport-transition-plan/ Michael Matheson, Cabinet Secretary for Transport, Infrastructure and Connectivity Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



In the face of COVID-19 new challenges have emerged rapidly, and long term social and technological trends have been accelerated, meaning that many of the issues identified with disabled people in co-producing the 2016 Framework, while still important, are no longer the most pressing issues faced. Our work on accessible travel in the period ahead must be responsive to this evolving landscape, and in Part 3, we set out how we intend to take forward our work on delivering the Framework in the future. In presenting this progress report, I would like to offer my particular thanks to the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland (MACS), Disability Equality Scotland (DES), the Accessible Travel Steering Group and SEStran. All of whom have continued to support the development and implementation of the Framework and it’s delivery plans, helping co-deliver lasting improvements for the lives of disabled people across Scotland, while adapting flexibly to the pressures of COVID-19.

Michael Matheson MSP Cabinet Secretary for Transport, Infrastructure and Connectivity

Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



Part 1: The Role of Accessible Travel in Response to COVID 19 Summary:  Our Transport Transition Plan4 continues to develop to tackle the challenges posed by COVID-19 and provide a safe transport system to meet the needs of the country and to keep Scotland moving. It informs passengers on when and how to safely access public transport; supports management of travel demand; reinforces broader messages on physical distancing and; discourages unnecessary travel. It will sustain positive behaviour changes, encouraging active travel options and staggering journeys to avoid peak times. Finally, it will inform passengers and road users of busy areas and times to encourage alternative choices  A Transport Transition Plan Equalities Network was set up to support the Impact Assessment of public transport COVID-19 measures.  A Transport Transition Plan National Advisory Group was established, with representation from the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland (MACS), to align national, regional and local activities.  The Scottish Transport Accessibility Steering Group has been convened to gather the views of transport providers, disabled people, and disabled peoples’ organisations to monitor the impacts of COVID-19 and policy changes on travel.  Disability Equality Scotland (DES) has been funded to engage with disabled people and pan-disability groups to gather first-hand lived experiences.  The Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland (MACS) has been supported in an expanded capacity to have a direct role in shaping the government’s response to COVID-19. Transport Scotland Resources during this period have been diverted away from delivering the priorities set out in the 2019-2020 Annual Delivery Plan, and towards supporting and embedding the principles of accessible travel in our responses to the pandemic. ‘Nothing about us without us’ remains a core principle of our accessible travel work, stressing the need to engage with disabled people to co-produce government policy which affects their lives. This has supported the following outcomes:

4 https://www.transport.gov.scot/coronavirus-covid-19/transport-transition-plan/ Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



The collection and development of robust evidence and provide input in to the impact assessments5 that were carried out in relation to the Plan. This network brought together a wide range of experts and stakeholders from Scotland’s equality community, including the Poverty and Inequality Commission, Equality and Human Rights Commission, Young Scot, Engender, and Disability Equality Scotland (DES).  We have established the Transport Transition Plan National Advisory Group to align approaches and share knowledge across national, regional and local activity, taking broader consideration of equality impacts and tailoring measures to specific places and sectors. The Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland represent disabled people’s interests on this Group.  We are in the early stages of planning the Future of Transport Forum, which will act as an overarching engagement platform bringing together stakeholders to facilitate collective considerations and discussions on the future of the transport system in Scotland. This Forum will be supported by three groups: o the Transport Citizen Panel, bringing together individuals, communities and their representative groups; o the Transport Steering Group comprised of operators, service providers, local authorities and other official bodies, and; o the Transport Partnership with members being drawn from across government and other key stakeholder groups. While specific timelines are still being firmed up, we anticipate that the first Forum session will be held in early spring 2021.  The Accessible Travel Policy Steering Group has continued to meet quarterly with representation from a range of disability groups to help ensure pan-disability needs have been considered in the policy development process, and stakeholders have been kept informed of developments.  Disability Equality Scotland (DES) has been funded by Transport Scotland to engage with disabled people and pan-disability groups through consultations, regular webinars6 and weekly member’s polls7 to gather lived experience from disabled people, which includes topics relating to transport and travel.

5 Equality Impact Assessment, Fairer Duty Scotland Impact Assessment, and Child Rights and Wellbeing Impact Assessment 6 https://disabilityequality.scot/webinars/ 7 https://disabilityequality.scot/news/disability-equality-scotland-poll-indicates-99-had-concerns-over- physical-distancing/ Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland During this crisis we have supported an expanded role for the Scottish Government’s specialist expert advisory body, the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland (MACS)8. MACS has a remit to give advice to Scottish Ministers and other transport providers and stakeholders on the travel needs of disabled people. They have developed a cross portfolio role across Scottish Government, which has afforded them the opportunity to influence connecting policies. MACS has had a direct role in shaping the Government’s response to COVID-19 through our facilitation of their membership of key decision-making forums such as the National Transport Strategy Delivery Board. Through direct engagement with policymakers working on COVID-19 across government, MACS have also produced public guidance, including:  ‘Transport Transition Plans - guidance to operators on assisting disabled passengers’9.  ‘Temporary Street measures during the Coronavirus Crisis’10.  ‘Coronavirus (COVID-19): guidance on safer public spaces - urban centres and green spaces, Section 5.2 Wider accessibility and inclusion’11. Third Sector Organisations We have been engaging with many third sector organisations who represent the interests of disabled people, who have been working incredibly hard in difficult circumstances raising awareness of under-appreciated issues and using their unique insights to produce guidance for transport operators and service providers. We have worked to share and promote this material across government and with our stakeholders. Examples of this include:  Guide Dogs UK guidance for bus operators to ensure drivers and other staff feel confident when helping passengers with sight loss12.

8 https://www.transport.gov.scot/our-approach/accessible-transport/mobility-and-access-committee-for- scotland-macs/ 9 https://www.transport.gov.scot/media/47623/macs-guidance-for-disabled-passengers-transition- plans.pdf 10 https://www.transport.gov.scot/media/47546/temporary-street-measures-during-the-coronavirus- crisis.pdf 11 https://www.gov.scot/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-safer-public-spaces-scotland-urban-centres- green-spaces/pages/5/ 12 https://www.guidedogs.org.uk/about-us/what-we-do/research/Policy-and-guidance-for- businesses/Guidance-for-bus-staff Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



RNIB guidance for supermarkets to support the shopping experience for blind and partially sighted customers13.  Future Journeys Observatory design guidance for providers; insights, ideas and inspiration to help make reconfigured services inclusive and accessible.

13 https://www.rnib.org.uk/sites/default/files/APDF-Supportingblindandpartiallysightedshoppers.pdf Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



Part 2: Progress on the 2019-2020 Annual Delivery Plan Summary:  The 2019-2020 Annual Delivery Plan, co-produced with the Scottish Transport Accessibility Steering Group and MACS, set out eight thematic priority areas drawn from issues identified in the ten year Accessible Travel Framework.  Each priority set out a number of key actions for the period of June 2019 to June 2020.  At this stage these priorities fall in to three categories: o Delivered, o Delivery in progress, o Continuous improvement to be integrated into future programmes of work (see Part 3). Theme High Level Aim Status Passenger Assistance More people with reduced mobility using public transport who require passenger assistance use trains and ferries. Delivered Aviation All Scotland’s airports improve service to disabled passengers and the seven largest airports receive good or very good rating from the Civil Aviation Authority’s (CAA) 2019-2020 Accessibility Performance Analysis. Continuous Improvement Bus Enable more disabled people in Scotland to use buses by working towards fully accessible information, infrastructure and design. Continuous Improvement Signs, Wayfinding and information Improve wayfinding signage and information. Continuous Improvement Thistle Assistance Every disabled person will have access to an effective, national assistance card across all transport modes Delivered Clear Pathways Ensure paths and pavements are clear and accessible for all. In progress Taxi and Private Hire Cars Taxi and Private Hire Cars (PHCs) are available across Scotland and meet the needs of disabled people. In progress Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



Hate Crime Through a joint approach, we implement a national Hate Crime Charter to ensure all citizens can travel free from bullying and harassment on all modes of transport. In progress Table 1: the above table provides an update against each theme of the Accessible Travel Framework.

Impact of COVID 19 COVID-19 meant that work on the Accessible Travel Framework, and on implementing the 2019-2020 Annual Delivery Plan, was paused at the end of March 2020. Nevertheless, we have made significant progress on a number of our priorities despite the extreme pressures placed on local transport authorities and transport operators;  Despite demand being severely suppressed14 ScotRail strived to ensure that assistance was made available to those who continued to require it. In consultation with disabled people’s organisations, they implemented a number of physical distancing measures, which were agreed by disabled groups.  Northlink Ferries have introduced ‘Rambling Tags’ to enable continued assistance for visually impaired passengers. This permitted the provision of assistance whilst at a safe distance with no direct physical contact.  The Thistle Assistance card was extended to provide an exemption message for those who are unable to wear a face covering on public transport. This was crucial in reducing the public’s anxieties and increasing confidence in returning to transport. Since June 2020, SEStran have issued almost 9,000 cards across Scotland for those seeking face covering exemptions. To help us better understand the impact of the pandemic on public transport, we have been supporting and participating in the innovative Future Journeys Observatory.15The group aims to extract and understand the impact COVID-19 is having on disabled people, including their mobility, how inclusive and accessible newly reconfigured services really are, and how confidence to travel can be strengthened. Through this work, examples are used to build a ‘library’ of good ideas, and create design guidance for service providers. Progress Update - Passenger Assistance ScotRail’ s Passenger Assist booking time will change from two hours to one hour in spring 2021 in contrast to train operators across the rest of the UK where the booking

14 at the peak of COVID 19 with only around 10% of people asking for assistance compared to same period 2018/19. 15 https://futurejourneys.squarespace.com/ Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



time is six hours. Additionally, a “turn up and go” package has also been formalised which explains clearly what customers should do and expect if they have not booked in advance. New designated meeting points will also be clearly marked and identifiable at all stations. Last year also saw the launch of the British Sign Language (BSL) app16. This app has significantly helped ScotRail frontline staff communicate with BSL users during their journey. Going forward, staff training requirements will also be enhanced through the creation of new mandatory training plans being agreed with the Office of Rail and Road17. The first phase of the Rail Delivery Group’s Trans Report 18Passenger Assist System was launched on 22 September. An online and face to face media campaign also went live over the festive season, before the phase two launch of a Passenger App early in 2021. The app, developed by Transreport for the entire rail industry, will enable passengers to book, change and cancel assistance quickly, without the need for a lengthy phone call. Users can also create a personal profile so that they do not need to input their personal details each time they want to book. The app will also provide rail staff with live journey information and will strengthen staff communications both of which will allow staff to anticipate and react to challenges in successfully delivering assistance. Ferry Operator CalMac also launched their on-line assistance booking tool early in 2020 and are working with the National Autistic Society to create “story boards” detailing journey processes for both major and small vessels together with sensory bags being made available on-board. Progress Update - Aviation Work on this priority was focussed on Inverness Airport, which is operated, by Highlands and Islands Airports Limited (HIAL). The aviation industry has seen a dramatic drop in passenger numbers as a result of COVID-19 and the industry faces one of the longest recovery periods given the impact on route networks. Inverness Airport has been no exception with passenger numbers down over 85% in 2020. Despite this, their customer service ratings remain high and the Airport has remained focussed on accessibility for all. A recent UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) survey showed 87.5% of arriving passengers rated the Special Assistance service as excellent and the remaining 12.5% as good. Departing passengers rated the service as 100% excellent. Prior to the pandemic Inverness Airport were working with a local college to develop a programme to enable young people with additional needs to volunteer as Airport

16 https://contactscotland-bsl.org/ 17 Home page | Office of Rail and Road (orr.gov.uk) 18 https://transreport.co.uk/ Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



Ambassadors; giving them exposure to the workplace. The Airport remain hopeful that this project can be brought to fruition once it is safe to do so. Inverness Airport’s commitment to accessibility was recognised by the Access and Inclusivity Award from the Nairn Access Panel. They were also delighted to win the Excellence in Transport Accessibility19 award from the Scottish Transport Awards Summit held in October this year. Inverness continue to work with AccessAble20 to produce accessibility guides hosted on their website and have started discussions with Trusted Travel Buddies who provide assisted travel to those who require additional support when travelling. Investment has also been made to purchase four Aviramp platforms to allow easy and dignified access to aircraft for wheelchair users and others who may previously have required the use of an ambulift.  Aviramps are also being rolled across all eleven of HIAL’s airports. On the 3 December, the CAA published its fifth annual report21 on the disability access of 31 of the UK’s largest airports. Glasgow Airport’s Special Assistance service received the highest “Very Good” rating for the second successive year, with Edinburgh and Inverness receiving a “Good” rating. The report covers the period from 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 prior to aviation being significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Progress Update - Bus Bus patronage has been subject to long term decline but COVID-19 has accelerated that trend. Transport Scotland continues to monitor trends in public transport usage including through a Transport Trends Report 22.  In addition to providing emergency funding of up to £191.3 million and maintaining concessionary reimbursement and Bus Service Operator Grant at pre-COVID levels to keep bus services running for those who rely on them. We launched the Bus Partnership Fund23 last year, as part of our response to the climate emergency. The Fund will support mode shift from cars to bus, through over £500 million of long-term bus priority infrastructure funding to tackle the negative

19 https://www.transporttimes.co.uk/news.php/Brilliant-Transport-Projects-and-Individuals-Praised-at- the-2020-Virtual-Scottish-Transport-Award-Summit-572/ 20 https://www.accessable.co.uk/ 21 http://publicapps.caa.co.uk/modalapplication.aspx?catid=1&pagetype=65&appid=11&mode=detail&id=9 874&filter=2 22 https://www.transport.gov.scot/publication/covid-19-transport-trend-data-2-8-november-2020/. The figures are prepared by Transport Scotland statisticians, compare actual journeys against baseline figures, and are derived from a range of sources including the Department for Transport. 23 https://www.transport.gov.scot/public-transport/buses/bus-partnership-fund/ Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland


effects of congestion on bus, so that bus journeys are quicker, more punctual and reliable. We are committed to achieving a just and green recovery and supporting bus travel is key to that. As set out in the National Transport Strategy24, the benefits of bus, particularly to addressing the climate emergency and tackling inequality, are clear. The Bus Partnership Fund is a key part of delivering on the priorities outlined in the Strategy. In 2018, the UK Government consulted publicly on plans to require the provision of audible and visible information on-board local bus and coach services across Great Britain, which is a reserved matter. This included holding events to understand the perspective of stakeholders in Scotland. We understand that responding to the consultation has taken longer than anticipated, due to the need to explore technical implementation options with industry specialists, but also due to other work pressures. The UK Government however remains committed to increasing the provision of accessible information across local bus and coach networks in Great Britain, and it is hoped that a formal response to the consultation, including confirming next steps, will be produced in the near future. In the meantime, we continue to encourage operators not to wait for Regulations to be made before providing accessible information on-board their vehicles, and indeed, there are Scottish bus operators that now specify such provision as a standard feature of new vehicles. Engagement will continue with the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish Governments to ensure that any eventual solution works for passengers and operators alike, wherever they are in the UK. Finally, we also launched a six-week consultation25 on new proposals to offer free bus travel for young people resident in Scotland aged under 19. Over a third of people already benefit from free bus travel in Scotland. The proposed extension of free bus travel to approximately 770,000 young people will deliver on the budget agreement, as reaffirmed in the recent Programme for Government26, and help to realise the vision proposed through the National Transport Strategy – contributing to a transport system with reduced inequalities and one that advances equality of opportunity. Progress Update – Signs, Wayfinding and Information New street signage was installed by Aberdeen City Council during the summer of 2020 which included wayfinding information situated next to the Northlink Ferry

24 National Transport Strategy (NTS) 25 Consultation on free bus travel for people resident in Scotland aged under 19 - Scottish Government - Citizen Space 26 Programme for Government 2019-20: Protecting Scotland’s Future (transport.gov.scot) Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



Terminal. Insights from ‘Making Connections27’ informed the design and placement of this signage. Our continued work with the Future Journeys Observatory will enable us to access examples of innovative ways information is used. Findings from the Future Journeys Observatory also enabled Northlink Ferries to consider new types of signage required to respond to COVID-19 restrictions. A more inclusive prototype design for floor signage was developed and introduced while considering the wider implications of queuing and distancing systems on accessibility and inclusion. Signs, wayfinding and information is more important than ever in 2020 in responding to COVID-19 and moving forward we will continue to work closely with our key stakeholders to establish and progress priorities in this area. Progress Update – Thistle Assistance Thistle Assistance is an initiative to help older people and those with disabilities or illness feel safer and more comfortable when using public transport. Thistle Assistance’s 28card and app let transport staff know in an easy and subtle way what extra support you would like. All seven Regional Transport Partnerships (RTP), Transport Scotland, Transport Operators and disability groups (including RNIB, SATA, and Disability Equality Scotland) support it. The card and app are free to use for anyone who needs it and can be used for one journey or purpose, or every day. SEStran have continued to work with key transport providers and other stakeholders to explore how their new approach can be integrated into their existing processes to improve awareness and understanding of the accessibility issues faced by customers. They have also collaborated to create a nation-wide approach on how to best help and engage travellers who may need a little extra help from getting from A to B. A campaign with a new website29 and social media for Thistle Assistance direct under the slogan ‘A Little Help Goes A Long Way’ was developed and implemented to good effect with Thistle’s online presence continually increasing. The website and social media sites continue to see regular traffic and the App has had almost 6,000 downloads since March and almost 20,000 cards and leaflets haven been distributed across Scotland. A dedicated phone line & online contact system with a mail out approach was also set up to manage this increased demand and has been operating successfully since March 2020. With this nationwide effort, SEStran supported by the other RTPs have seen an improvement in customer

27 https://www.upstream.scot/making-connections 28 Thistle Assistance | Your Travel Companion – Discreet public transport support at your fingertips 29 https://www.thistleassistance.com/ Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



experiences and through social media they can now connect directly with travellers to ensure the card can be used safely and securely across Scotland.

Progress Update – Clear Pathways The Transport (Scotland) Act 2019 introduced provisions to introduce a National prohibition on pavement parking. We are progressing with the secondary legislation and guidance, which is required to be in place before Local Authorities, will have the powers to enforce those prohibitions. Transport Scotland, Scottish Government and the Department for Transport (DfT) commissioned research into Inclusive Design in town centres and busy streets. This focus of the research is on two main aspects - evidence on how inclusive engagement approaches can support inclusive design, and evidence on physical design measures that can support inclusive design. Following publication shortly, guidance on inclusive design will be developed in collaboration with a stakeholder- working group, which includes representatives from disabled peoples’ organisations. Progress Update – Taxi and Private Hire Cars (PHC) There were 10,153 taxis and 14,271 private hire cars licensed in Scotland based on figures provided by Scottish local licensing authorities during October-November 2019. The figures show that licensed taxis have fallen by 203 and private hire cars have risen by 428 compared with figures for 2018. Latest figures show that of the 10,153 licensed taxis, 4,835 (48%) are wheelchair accessible, the same proportion and slight increase in the total number of accessible vehicles from the previous year. The proportion of wheelchair accessible vehicles varies across different authority areas30. An analysis of Scottish transport statistics31 (published March 2020) shows that the number of wheelchair accessible taxis and PHCs in Scotland has remained relatively stable over the past five years, but against a backdrop of steadily increasing overall numbers. We have been working on developing new guidance on taxi and PHC accessibility for local decision-makers. Despite being in the very early stages of development, we have been exploring links to other areas of policy, have presented information to the Accessible Travel Policy Steering Group, MACS, and conducted a survey of local authorities. We hope to be in a position to share draft guidance with selected

30 https://www.transport.gov.scot/publication/scottish-transport-statistics-no-38-2019-edition/chapter-1- road-transport-vehicles/#tb14 - see Table 1.4 31 https://www.transport.gov.scot/publication/scottish-transport-statistics-no-38-2019-edition/chapter-1- road-transport-vehicles/#tb14 Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



stakeholders in due course, and would invite those with an interest in this area to engage with us to share their views.

Progress Update – Hate Crime We have worked with Disability Equality Scotland, Police Scotland, SEStran and People First to create a nationally recognised system to encourage transport providers, members of the public and other services to support zero-tolerance to all forms of hate crime on public transport. Three separate pilots were launched with Stagecoach, First Bus and ScotRail between December 2019 and January 2020. Initial results of the pilot indicated that it reached over 1.2 million people in an eight-week period. 24 reports of hate crime were made during that period, one specifically from a pilot area and that awareness had been raised amongst transport staff who felt better equipped to recognise and report hate crime. The Working Group has reconvened and continue to work towards a soft launch in spring 2021. In May 2020, Disability Equality Scotland began a separate pilot project with Caledonian MacBrayne Ferries as part of the Ferries Accessibility Fund to design and implement policy and guidance which challenges hate crime on the ferries network, encouraging reporting and working with transport staff to increase knowledge and awareness of hate crime. The commitment to agree a Hate Crime Charter was also set out in Tackling Prejudice and Building Connected Communities Action Plan32, which was published in 2017. An Action Group was established, chaired by the Cabinet Secretary for Communities, with key stakeholders, to take forward the wider programme of work. One of the key priorities identified by the Action Group is on victim support through raising awareness of hate crime and encouraging reporting. In addition to the work on the Hate Crime Charter, we have also launched regular hate crime campaigns in partnership with Police Scotland to encourage victims and witnesses to report it. Most recently, we launched the ‘Letters from Scotland’ campaign in October 2020, which is a series of letters addressed to the perpetrators of hate crime, including ‘Dear Disablists’. The letters state that ‘your hate has no home here’ and are signed ‘Yours Scotland’ to encourage those who read it to report hate crime if they witness it, helping to create a ‘One Scotland’ where hate crime and prejudice will not be tolerated.

32 https://www.gov.scot/publications/tackling-prejudice-building-connected-communities-scottish- government-response-report-independent/pages/5/ Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework 2019 – 2020 Delivery Plan Progress Report Transport Scotland



Part 3: The Future Delivering Scotland’s Accessible Travel Framework In 2021, subject to any reprioritisation as a result of COVID-19, we intend to produce:  A ‘short-list’ of priority areas and achievable, meaningful outcomes developed and agreed with a wide range of disabled people and organisations that represent them, to inform our Delivery Plan for 2021-2022.  A description of the barriers in terms of scenarios and journeys  A rich set of insights  A live, collaborative on-line document  And a new online community of engaged people and organisations Despite the challenges 2020 brought, our vision that all disabled people can travel with the same freedom, choice, dignity and opportunity as other citizens, has not changed. However, the impact of COVID-19 on transport in Scotland has changed what it looks like in practice and how we will achieve it. As always, we will use the Accessible Travel Framework as a guiding document We have already undertaken a series of webinars, including “Returning to Public Transport” which brought together around 50 disabled people, disabled people’s organisations and transport operators, to build confidence in disabled travellers to return to public transport and what to expect when doing so. Before April 2021, we aim to have completed up to five webinars covering a range of topics and the impacts on disabled people including Spaces for People33, which was introduced in response to COVID-19 and the increase in walking, wheeling and cycling during lockdown and 20 minute neighbourhoods, through an equalities lens. The place-based planning approach reflects a more joined-up, collaborative and participative approach to services, land and buildings across all sectors, enabling better outcomes for everyone and increased opportunities for people and communities to shape their own lives .The 20-minute neighbourhood is about living more locally, reducing demand for unsustainable transport. New challenges, over the past year have emerged rapidly and the priorities and issues identified by disabled people pre-pandemic, whilst still important are no longer the most pressing issues we are facing.  Our work with the Future Journeys Observatory and continued engagement with the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland, and the Accessible Travel Steering Group will help shape our future priorities and ensure that we deliver them appropriately in 2021–2022.

33 Sustrans: Spaces For People Projects

Crown copyright 2021 You may re-use this information (excluding logos and images) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence or e-mail: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. Further copies of this document are available, on request, in audio and visual formats and in community languages. Any enquiries regarding this document / publication should be sent to us at info@transport.gov.scot This document is also available on the Transport Scotland website: www.transport.gov.scot Published by Transport Scotland, January 2021 Follow us:

transcotland @transcotland transport.gov.scot